 Part Ill
A RECORD BOOK OF BLESSED JOHN’S
INTERCESSIONS

 Editor’s Preface
In continuing the collection of materials which was begun for the Chronicle of the Ven- eration of Blessed John, the St. Herman of Alaska Brotherhood has_ received a number of communications from people of various nat- ionalities, many of whom never knew Blessed John personally. Their accounts reveal the ever-increasing veneration of this great won-
derworker of our times, and also testify to his powerful intercession for those in need. One of the most touching and impressive as-
pects of Blessed John is,
continued presence among us. It is quite obvi- ous, as one hierarch stated on the very day of Blessed John's funeral, that he is not dead, but alive, and in many ways he reveals himself to those who believe in his sanctity.
Many of the following testimonies recount stunning miracles which Blessed John perform- ed both during his life and after his repose; others record relatively "small" indications that believing people are calling upon him as a living saint—and that he is answering them, visiting them, appearing to them and inspiring them in the humble and sober path of true Orthodoxy. Taken together, these testimonies form a vivid and compelling picture of Ortho- dox sanctity. It is a picture viewed from all Sides, through the eyes of people of diverse backgrounds who in simplicity of heart cannot
quite simply, his
223

 224 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
conceal their love and gratitude to Blessed John. The editors have developed a close con- tact with the witnesses and thus take full res- ponsibility for the truthfulness of their testi- monies.
The first seven testimonies were collected by the St. Herman Brotherhood within a few years after Blessed John's repose, and record miracles which occurred in connection with his Sepulchre. The miracle recounted in tes- timony Number 8 happened to a family on its way home from the Sepulchre. Numbers 9-16 were taken from the last chapter of the Rus- sian-language Chronicle by Bishop Savva (St. Herman Brotherhood, 1976), which was pub- lished in commemoration of the 10th anniver- sary of Blessed John's repose. In Numbers 17-100 are included other testimonies gathered by the Brotherhood over the years, many of
which have appeared in the pages of The Or- thodox Word. At the time of this writing, mir- alces steadily continue to be reported.
Before the 20th anniversary of Blessed John's repose, the Brotherhood sent out the first 33 testimonies—as a Catalogue of Miracles
—to Orthodox hierarchs, clergy and laypeople in order to encourage his formal glorification by each local Orthodox Church. This Catalogue was distributed together with a Report for Ca- nonization, which urged the faithful to send
petitions for Blessed John's canonization to Orthodox bishops.
The accounts which follow represent the "voice of the people," proclaiming the full sig- nificance of a contemporary "God-bearer" to
a spiritually impoverished world. They bear

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 225
witness to the closeness of God, to. the abundant grace that He sheds on poor human sufferers as a sign of how dear the righteous exploits of the saints are to Him—as in ancient times, so in our modern post-Christian era.
1.
Deliverance from Blindness
A young registered nurse* living in San Francisco and working in one of the municipal hospitals, suddenly became blind in one eye. It became evident absolutely unexpectedly while at work when she had to give a patient a prescription—she looked at the label and saw nothing! Horror struck her! The doctors diagnosed that due to an inflamation of the
optic nerve one of her eyes was already to- tally blind and had become dead and needed to be removed in order to save the other one. With this, of course, her medical career was abruptly to come to an end.
She had known Archbishop John while yet in her childhood in the Far East and somewhere in Europe as well, and knew from her parents who revered him about his mira- cles. But he was dead long ago. In absolute despair she rushed to his Sepulchre as to a last hope and prayed with tears for a long time on his grave. She began to come fre- quently to the cathedral, praying before all the holy objects and then would descend to
* Gali Vasilev

 226 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
 General view of Blessed John's Sepulchre
the Sepulchre and pray there for a long time on his coffin so that others began to take no- tice of her. At work, meanwhile, she tried to conceal her misfortune, not knowing what to do. Thus passed several days.
Then one night she was seized with to- tal despair, and she devoted herself to flam- ing prayer, after which she opened at ran- dom the Holy Gospel and read the following: As Jesus passed by, he saw aman which was blind from his birth. And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor
his parents: but that the should be made manifest in
works of God him.... When he

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 227
had thus spoken he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with this clay. And said unto him: Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation, Sent). He went
his way, therefore, seeing (John 9:1-7).
and washed, and came
"QO Lord!" she
end with awe this passage that "by
exclaimed, having read
to the
chance" appeared before her, "if only I could get to the Holy Land and wash my eyes in the pool of Siloam, or at least get even a drop of this water—I will see anew!"
Early in the morning she went again to the Sepulchre of Blessed John and again prayed fervently there. Then a little, thin,
old woman unknown to her
said that she had recently
Land and had brought some holy water from the pool of Siloam and that she will bring the next day a little bottle with water, since the Divine Liturgy will be celebrated in the Se- pulchre and the Metropolitan himself will
serve! From these words of
beth," who, of course, did
thing about her prayer the
the afflicted girl was amazed and early in the morning she was in the Sepulchre before
dawn. During the Liturgy she received
approached, and visited the Holy
"Grandma Eliza- not know any- night previous,
Holy kneeling over the coffin of she applied the holy water to
Communion and
Blessed John
her ailing eyes. At once she felt better. The next day she already could see with the eye that was considered dead.
News about this miracle quckly began to be published and when it reached us, we met

 228 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
her and asked her to visit the bookshop of Blessed Herman of Alaska and to tell us ev- erything in detail. When on the appointed day she came and told us all the above, she then added that she had been confused since she prayed not only to Blessed John, but to a whole number of Saints whom she venerated, in the cathedral in front of their holy icons: Sts. Tikhon of Zadonsk, Nicholas, Seraphim, and others, begging them to help her. "And now even last night," she continued, "I was wavering about coming to you. At night I saw a dream, as if I was descending into some dark cellar with one window, while a lot of people are going there for some purpose and I also had to go there for something, and with effort managed to push myself in. Then I see it is Archbishop John's Sepulchre, but everything looks different, and there in the
center is Blessed John in his mantle—alive! Others were placing sick people on him to be healed. Then I see they are placing an ap- parently dead woman on him and she slowly begins to move, becomes well and gets up by herself. Others are waiting for their turn. Whatever this might mean, I decided to come to you and tell you how everything was."
All this took place at a time when the enemies of Blessed John, though they became a little more quiet, nevertheless continued confusing people and thereby have consider- ably diminished faith in the Righteous One.
And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 229 made blind (John 9:39).
September, 1968 Reader Eugene Rose Blessed Herman of Alaska Brotherhood San Francisco, California
2.
Deliverance from Certain Death
I give witness concerning the miracu- lous healing of my brother, Vadim Vasilievich Kozachenko, by the prayers of our dear Vla- dika John. This occurred after Vladika's death, when he was reposing in his Sepul- chre; but he heard us and helped us as if a- live.
One would like to talk a lot about Vla- dika. Many times while he was alive, in Shanghai and in Europe, Vladika miraculously healed the sick. In my own life the healing of Vadim is already the second miracle from Vla- dika. The first miracle was in 1952; I was in England, where my son Philip was born. From his birth Philip was very unhealthy, and on August 19th he became quite seriously ill. I wrote Vladika in Brussels. I received a letter from him and a leaf from a tree under which Jesus Christ had prayed; and I placed this letter under the child's pillow. He began to get better. It was notable that he became better on the very day when Vladika received my letter.
With Vadim this all occurred very unex- pectedly. On Wednesday, March 15th, 1967, my brother's wife Nadia phoned me and said that my brother was dying. According to her

 230 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
words, "The doctor said Vadim would not live until the following Monday. Prepare Mother, and come to say farewell and bury him." We did not know that he had been so seriously ill, because two weeks before this I had spoken with him on the telephone and he had assured me that he was completely well.
On the next day we went to San Fran- cisco. When we saw Vadim we were horrified. His face was the color of tobacco, the whites of his eyes were bright yellow; he was thin, with a swollen stomach and swollen feet. Whe- ther he recognized us or not I don't know; I remember that everything was indifferent to him. It was difficult to believe that the doc- tor had sent such a dying person home. I personally called his doctor, but I could not find out anything except that if he should live until Monday he would make some kind of examination and tests. But he was very dubi- ous that this would be necessary.
We had only one hope: the Lord and the prayers of our holy Vladika. On the same evening we phoned Father Constantine Zanev- sky and asked him to come on Friday and give Communion to Vadim. Nadia and I went to church and to the Sepulchre of Vladika John. After the first prayer at the tomb of Vladika the hope was aroused that Vladika would help us. Nadia felt this hope the same as I did. On Friday Vadim became worse. Fa- ther Constantine came and gave him Commu- nion. He confessed consciously, but then a- gain fell into unconsciousness. All our thoughts were in the prayer: "Dear Vladika, instruct and help us to do what is necessary

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 231
to help Vadim. Do not leave us, dear Vladi- ka. By your holy prayers intercede for us and help us."
Suddenly the thought came to me _ to take Vadim to the Veteran's Hospital. It was as though some kind of power was pushing for this: Quickly, quickly, take him to Fort Miley. Again I phoned the doctor. He almost laughed that we wanted to do this. There was no hope. Why should we bother him and take him from one place to another? Despite these refusals by the doctor, we went to church, prayed, and decided to prepare the papers to take him to Fort Miley. Nadia and I were in a terrible state, but there was a firm faith and hope that Vladika would help. Later
in the evening Vadim
was lying unconscious,
risen, and we thought
nia. We gathered to take him to Fort Miley, but he, recovering consciousness, begged us to take him to a private hospital, Mount Zion, and not change his doctor. Nadia and I could not decide what to do; we both wanted to take him to the Veteran's Hospital at Fort Mi- ley. We promised Vadim to leave him in the private hospital. Again we prayed to Vladika: "Help us, dear Vladika; instruct us and help us!"
Here Leonid Michaelovich Zubrilin came to the house and insisted on taking Vadim to the Veteran's Hospital. His advice and that of my husband Rostislav were like an answer to our prayers to Vladika. Despite all the argu- ments of the doctor, we called an ambulance and took Vadim, who was now totally uncon-
became quite bad: he his temperature had
that he had pneumo-

 232 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
scious, to the Veteran's Hospital. There, towards evening, we found out that when Va- dim had been taken to the Veteran's Hospital he already had four diseases: cirrhosis of the liver, an overflow of bile, internal bleeding, and pneumonia. The doctor told us that Va- dim was very seriously ill, and that from the medical point of view there was no hope; but if we had faith, then we should pray, be- cause only a miracle could save him.
Vadim became yet worse. He_- was brought into the critical ward. He opened his eyes rarely; sometimes he was aware and would joke, but most of all he would be deli- rious. On Sunday after the Liturgy we had a panikhida served in the Sepulchre. On this day we became acquainted with Father Mitro- phan, who often served in the Sepulchre, and received a blessing from Bishop Nektary to give Unction to Vadim. News of Vadim's
illness quickly spread not only in
but in other cities and states. Everyone was praying to our dear Vladika John. Father Mi- trophan did not stop praying for Vadim. Na- dia and I knew only two paths: from home to church, and from church to the hospital. But despite the fact that Vadim was very ill, our faith was growing stronger and stronger that Vladika John would save Vadim for us by his prayers. Only a short time before this Vadim had told me that when he was very ill he had often seen Vladika John and our reposed Fa- ther, sometimes in a dream and _ sometimes when awake. He was already dying and heard some kind of special singing and music, of which he spoke in his delirium.
the city,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 233
After receiving Unction, Vadim became better and recognized his family. Father Mi- trophan gave Communion to Vadim again in the hospital. A week went by. His heart be- came better; this might drag on and contin- ue. The doctor advised me to return home to Redding. After we returned, three times more
we were
the words
hand; he
time they had already prepared a shirt and suit for Vadim's burial, and they had already agreed what kind of coffin to buy and where to bury him. All this was done somehow me- chanically. And then a strange thing hap- pened.
We were standing in despair at the tomb of Vladika, and I was mentally speaking with Viadika: "Dear Vladika, if this is the holy will of the Lord, help us to bear this diffi- cult loss. Help Nadia with her two small chil- dren, and my Mother. Do not leave us; help us." I had given myself entirely over to these thoughts and, as if in reply, Vladika said to me: "Are you doubting in God's mer- cy? Why do you not believe God? That's not the way I taught you." I was ashamed for my
doubts, but also joyful because I felt that Viladika had heard our prayers. Next to me at this time stood Olga Nikolaevna Zubrilina. She was likewise praying for Vadim. I turned to her and already with joyful tears I told her what had gone on in my mind. She told me: "Valechka, our Vladika is a Saint. He has heard our prayers. Believe me, dear one, Va-
dim will get better." From this day on there
called, of
and each time, according to the doctor, the end was at not hold out long. The last
could

 234 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
were no more doubts: Vadim would get bet- ter, although the doctors continued to assure us that there was no hope, and only a mira- cle would save him. Yes, we know; but we believe in miracles, and by a miracle of our Vladika, Vadim would become well.
After this Vadim became very ill twice more. Again he was placed in the ward for the critically ill. Nadia phoned me and said that the doctor was absolutely trying to per- suade her to go straight to the morgue and begin preparations for the burial. But at this time she had such faith in his recovery that she advised us not to come, saying that she
did not believe the doctor. I immediately phoned the Zubrilins and asked them to go to Father Mitrophan, so that he might give Com- munion to Vadim once more. When Father Mi- trophan came to the hospital, the doctor said that they were expecting his death any min- ute. Glory be to God, by the prayers of Vla- dika John death passed by, and from that
day Vadim began to get better.
Soon Pascha came, and it was a joyful
one.
skin and
but still
then to
sensibly,
stand what had happened to him. The physi- cians were astonished. How could such a sick man get better? After all, for a whole month he had lain unconscious, although there had been moments when he did recognize things.
His wife had been called four times from work because death was near. Truly this was a mi-
Vadim was terribly thin; bones and had grown
he was only
he looked better. He
eat everything. He began to
and then did he begin to
under-
much was
older, allowed speak

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 235
did what we given you time. His
he _ was
At the beginning of June, the day fi- nally came when the physicians decided to let him go home. He was placed on a very strict diet. The doctors told his wife that he would never be able to work again. Despite the fact that he had gotten better, his stomach was still very swollen; there was much water, and therefore the danger had not passed away, and the illness might return, or he might get sick to death again. Nadia, I, and all the other members of the family did not worry very much over this because we believed that everything would be all right. Days, weeks, and months passed by and his stomach was still swollen and there were no signs that it would go down.
Returning home to Redding from one of my trips, I was very much suffering for Na- dia, for I had noticed that she had begun to become discouraged. As always, my thoughts went to Vladika John. Before my return to
Redding, I had gone to the cathedral to pray at Vladika's tomb. I so much wanted to see him, to hear his voice, to speak with him. At home on this very evening, my thoughts a- gain returned to my sick brother. I remem- bered Shanghai and how in difficult moments I would run to the cathedral to Vladika to share with him my sorrows or my joy. "If you were with us, dear Vladika," I thought, "if you would place your hands on his sick bo-
racle.
could,
life."
liver
recovering quickly.
The physicians said: "We but it was God who has He got better all the
was totally restored, and

 236 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
dy, I believe that you would get rid of this swelling and this water, just as our Lord Je- sus Christ banished the unclean spirits." And here—I say this honestly with my whole soul and heart—I do not know whether I fell a- sleep or was half awake: I saw Vladika John come into my bedroom dressed in a gray cas- sock with a black belt. He had his prayer rope in his hand, and on his head a small kamilavka. Entering the room, he turned to me and said, "Well, what kind of misfortune do you have now, that you are grieving so?"
From my childhood mocking tone with
Vladika me, as a
always grownup
had a would
have with
eyes were full of love, and there was a smile on his lips. Here we were both near the bed on which the sleeping Vadim was lying. He went up to the bed and, not looking at me, he asked, "What's wrong here?" I told Vladi- ka that Vadim had a swollen stomach and that there was much liquid in his stomach, and began to explain to him, saying: "If you would place your hands on Vadim, I know that you would deliver him from swelling and liquid and all the other filth he has in his organism."
Vladika bent down over Vadim, placed his hands on his shoulders, and began to pray; I felt that there was no need for me to say any more. Vladika prayed. I know that my eyes followed every one of his movements. Vadim lay on his back, his hands stretched out at his sides. Vladika with his hands en- circled and moved down his body as if he were chasing out all the filth and impurity,
children.
So it was
now, but his

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 237
all the poison, not only from his stomach, but from his whole body. With each movement I felt that I was witnessing a miracle, that from this moment Vadim would begin to get well. Vladika finished, took his hands from the feet of Vadim, straightened himself out, and then vanished. I did not manage to say a word to express to him my gratitude; Vladika was no longer there. I wished to run after him, and at this moment I saw that I was in my own room in Redding. I got up from my bed and put out the light. I stood on my Knees and prayed with tears of gratitude to the Lord God, and thanked our dear intercessor and man of prayer. In my soul was peace and tender feeling.
When I phoned Nadia, she informed me that they had noticed a change, that is, Va-
dim's stomach
it began to
very much
"A miracle, a miracle!" With every day Vadim became stronger and better. The day finally came when he was allowed to eat everything he wanted, first a little at a time, then nor- mally. He grew strong; his appetite was good. The swelling and liquid went away as if
they had never
been. They took
Vadim off return to panikhida
had become smaller. Gradually go down. The physicians were encouraged and again repeated,
his
work.
served
moleben
the hospital to thank all the physicians who had treated him. All of them as one told him: "Don't thank us; someone ‘up there' loves you very much." Yes, I know that our dear
medicines and Nadia and
allowed him Vadim had
to a=
at Vladika's
of thanksgiving. Then they went to
tomb, and
likewise a

 238 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Vladika loves and protects us, as always he has protected all of his spiritual children.
All of the people mentioned here are ready to affirm the truth of the description of this miracle by the prayers of Archbishop John.
3.
Miraculous Preservation in Vietnam
He who at least once visited Archbishop John's Sepulchre could not but notice and venerate a rather large beautiful icon of the Entrance of the Most Holy Mother of God into the Temple which is placed at the head of the coffin of Blessed John on an analogion in the very center of the Sepulchre. This icon in recent times was miraculously renewed in one pious Orthodox family. It was donated for the Sepulchre of Blessed John in gratitude for his benefactions towards that family as well as for all who are burdened with sufferings. It's owner, Ludmilla Leonidovna Holtz, lives in the city of San Francisco and deeply vene- rates Blessed John still from the time she was
in the Far East. Together with her mother she donated this holy object after a vow giv- en to God: when Archbishop John died they wanted very much that he would be left un- der the cathedral. (They had heard that the Church authorities wanted to take him away.) And so they gave a vow "to give to Blessed
Valentina October
Redding,
V.
Harvey 10, 1968 California

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 239
John for his Sepulchre" icon, which they did. merican, they came to
their Having
treasure—this married an A- country, where
this
they had a son born to them, John. When he
grew up he was drafted into the army. At that time the Vietnam war was raging. He also had a deep veneration for Blessed John, but when he went to Vietnam the blessed man was already not among the living. Not long before his departure, he came to the Sepulchre and placed a photograph of Blessed John under his mitre (which is kept right on the sarcophagus of the righteous one) with the intent of taking it back just before his departure for war as a blessing from the holy one. When he came back, he prayed at the coffin, took out the portrait, and placed it in the pocket of his uniform right over his heart as a protection against "the enemy's bullet." And with this he left for the front.
Here is what his mother’ witnesses, judging from his many letters from overseas, how our Lord, thanks to the prayers of Bles- sed John, preserved him from various dan- gers in a truly miraculous way. The bishop's portrait was constantly and without fail in the pocket near his heart, day and night, always. Being in the rank of corporal, John experienced a whole series of obvious mir- acles, when all around him would fall, dead or mortally wounded, and he alone would re- main unharmed. Once their squad was am- bushed, and he alone was neither killed nor wounded, while all others were either killed or taken captive. Another time a bomb hit their barracks, and those who stood right

 240 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
next to him were seriously injured. Neither was he harmed when he fell into an enemy trap, although he had to wrestle with the Vietcong, and even received a minor wound. Having completed his assignment on the front line, and being transferred to another mis- sion, he met his happy parents at a Hawaii airport. Only then did he fully realize how well he had been guarded and protected by the prayers and portrait of Blessed John.
In life nothing occurs by chance. The holy icon of the Entry of the Most Holy Theo- tokos into the Temple, by then donated to the Sepulchre, turned out to have a special significance there, which they had previously not known. This feast day was Archbishop John's favorite of all the celebrations of the Most Holy Mother of God; he was tonsured in Yugoslavia in a monastery dedicated to this holy day; on the same feast day he ar- rived at his first episcopal see in the Shang- hai cathedral, dedicated to the Mother of God
Icon, "Surety of Sinners"; and years later on this same feast day he arrived at his last episcopal see in the San Francisco cathedral, also of the Mother of God, the "Joy of All Who Sorrow."
Reader Gleb Podmoshensky January, 1968
Gilroy, California

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 241
4.
Healing of Leg Ailments
In the city of Monterey, California, there lived for many years a_ respectable gentleman, a venerator of Archbishop John, by the name of George Alexandrovitch Skaria- tin, who worked for Archbishop John for ma- ny years. Thanks to Mr. Skariatin, the house of St. Tikhon of Zadonsk was acquired in San Francisco in which to house Archbishop John's Shanghai orphans. Also because of him, the Archbishop John Fund was founded, the mission of which was to raise money for the charitable needs of the Bishop; Mr. Skar- iatin labored for that fund for many years. During his last years, much of his strength was spent defending the righteous one, which very likely hastened his premature death. His widow, Olga Michailovna, continues his work, sacrificing herself for this cause up to today. For many years she suffered from varicose veins in her legs, until finally she was compelled to be hospitalized; however, there was no relief for her ailment. After six weeks, the knots in her veins grew worse, and the doctor insisted on immediate surgery of the veins, which took place on October
18, 1967. They made twenty incisions. She then stayed in the hospital for a whole week. They brought her home completely debilitated and in unbearable pain. In the evening, Fr. Archimandrite Mitrophan telephoned to find out about her condition, and then told her: "Everything will go away thanks to the pray-

 242 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
ers of Archbishop John." The next day, early in the morning, she could not get up from bed to receive a special delivery letter from Fr. Mitrophan in which was enclosed a small piece of cotton saturated with oil from
the lamp
Apparently
after the
Sepulchre at midnight. text of the letter:
October 12/25, 1967 12:00 at night
of Archbishop John's’ sepulchre.
the letter had been
written right
Panikhida had
been Here is
served the
in the complete
Dear Olga Michailovna,
I was very glad to have talked to you
today on the telephone. I'm sending you holy oil from the lampada from the grave of Arch- bishop John. Open up the paper and every day anoint your leg (the sick spot) where there is no bandage. Cross yourself and say: "Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, through the prayers of our dear Vladika, heal me from sickness." I firmly believe that thanks to the prayerful intercession of our Vladika, the pain will instantly cease. May the mercy of God be with you.
Sincerely loving you in the Lord, your diligent supplicator before God,
Fr. Mitrophan
Having read the letter, Olga Michailovna did exactly as Fr. Mitrophan said. The pain
stopped almost was already on everything was healing amazed
at once, and her feet. From in order. This her very much.
next day she that moment, instantaneous
Previously,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 243
although she had heard much and had never doubted the miraculous help from the prayers of Archbishop John, she nevertheless had always been very cautious on that subject. Now, however, amazed at this case, she tells everyone about the power of prayerful inter- cession that comes from faith in Archbishop John. This is how Archbishop John expressed his gratitude to the widow of George Skaria- tin.
It is fitting here to draw an account of Fr. Archimandrite Mitrophan himself, who for many years lived in close contact with the righteous one. Moreover, Fr. Mitrophan's estimation of the ascetic life of Archbishop John, who undoubtedly led the life of a fool for Christ's sake, is very valuable, because Fr. Mitrophan, from his early childhood in the city of Voronezh in Russia, was in close contact with a genuine fool for Christ's sake, the great righteous Theoktista Michailovna, who died in 1936. Having become convinced through his personal experience of her clair- voyance, Fr. Mitrophan noticed a_ definite similarity between her and Archbishop John, about which he always testifies as undoubting
truth. To
a genuine
might seem
live with
saints. Here is what Fr. Mitrophan wrote to us personally, having titled this note:
From the Life of Archbishop John
On the outskirts of Paris, in a large back-alley, there was huddled a_ parish
others who have never had such
experience
an idle exaggeration.
in Holy
saints in order to judge about
Russia, this One must

 244 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
church of our Russian Church Abroad in hon- or of All Saints of Russia. This back-alley was actually a row of garages, or rather cub- by holes for parking cars. In connection with the difficulties in finding a suitable place for a church in the city, it was decided for this purpose
to rent to
adjacent garages. There was
no
foundation,
no ceiling, no
windows and
no
ventilation.
It was damp
and cold there.
The back-alley
had no human
inhabi- tants.
Of course, there was no_
telephone near the church nor in that alley. All this created difficulties for church services. I was
never renowned for strong health, and thus I would get so exhausted after serving there that for days I would be absolutely in- capacitated and could not fulfill my ecclesias- tical obligations. And so it happened that be- fore one major winter feast day I was quite sick. I took all sorts of medicines for my heart, and nothing helped. In such a condi-
tion I remained for four days. There was such weakness that I had no strength to get out of bed, but I fully realized that one of the major twelve feast days was at hand. In Paris, our Russian
Church Outside
of Russia
had only one church. come not only from from the area around the feast
approached,
The parishioners
would all over Paris,
but also the city. The eve
of and I was immovable
in bed. Besides
this, I was absolutely
help- less and alone in
a two-story house.
In just a few hours it would
be time for me
to take the train to church
in order to begin
the vigil, and I was
deprived of even
the possi- bility of sending
someone to hang
a notice on

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 245
the door of the church saying that I was sick and that there would be no church services. I fully realized that the poor parishioners would arrive from far away and would stand in the cold in bewilderment and sorrow, hav- ing to wait on this desolate day in front of closed church doors—to no avail. I was in terror. What must I do?—
Suddenly, like a ray of light chases away the darkness, so were my _ sorrowful thoughts chased away by the light-bearing thought that I had not done the most impor- tant thing, that I had not turned for help to Archbishop John. Archbishop John was at that time in America, in San Francisco, where he went to acquire funds for his former flock in order to build a church in Paris. As soon as I remembered about Archbishop John, I immediately felt an inflow of strength. I got out of bed, which I was not able to do earli- er, I sat down at the table, and began to write a letter to the Archbishop:
"Dear Vladika and Father. I'm writing a letter to you not with the aim of burdening
or
the
the
to church in order to serve vigil. I have ab- solutely no strength. I firmly believe that as soon as I have this letter written to you, I will be healthy."
The mailbox was downstairs on the wall of our house. I quickly got dressed, went downstairs from the second floor, put the letter into the mailbox, and, having forgotten about my sickness as if it had never existed,
saddening you. I have been sick almost
whole week, bed-ridden, but feast, and in several hours
tomorrow is I must go

 246 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
I briskly went up to my room. I took every- thing necessary for the church services and, absolutely healthy, went to church.
The bishop heard, with his boundlessly loving paternal heart, the sorrowful plea of his spiritual son, and, as he had done many times before, hastened to help him, for he had heard across the 7,000 miles which divid- ed us. Having penetrated the boundary of Space and time, Archbishop John not only heard me, from wherever he was, but at that very moment he also procured God's mercy, and into me was poured strength and health, overcoming all laws of our earthly existence.
Archimandrite Mitrophan (as told to Br. Gleb Podmoshensky)
December, 1968 Monterey, California
5.
Healing of a Dangerous Growth
I, Ivan Nikitich Lutsenko, feel obliged by my conscience to give testimony of how I was healed by the prayers of our beloved Vla- dika John.
For three or four years I had a growth on the joint of my next to the last finger, about the size of an apricot pit. For a long time I tried not to pay attention to it, al- though it bothered me a great deal. People sent me to the doctor to have it cut off. I went to the doctor. The doctor, Constantine Efimovich Zaharov, said that it would be dan-
gerous to cut it off, since he might hit a nerve, and then I wouldn't be able to bend

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 247
the finger any more. But I wanted him to cut off the growth for me. People were already talking about it at work.
I have revered Vladika for a long time. About a year after Vladika's death, soon after the Sepulchre was opened and one could go there, I went there one day. I can't say that I went to him especially to ask his help, but just because he was so very dear to me. Coming to the Sepulchre, I kissed his mantle
which
is on the sarcophagus,
placed a candle,
kissed the mitre. I stayed
there a while.
I prayed at Vladika John's
and then somehow forgot about it. In two days the finger began to itch. I saw that the growth had begun to soften, and in a week and a half it had entirely disappeared. And I had suffered with it for three or four years.
I absolutely believe that it was Vladika who helped. I had not gone to him in the Sepulchre for a long time, and then I went
and see what happened! San
Ivan Lutsenko February, 1969 Francisco, California
6.
Help in Finding a Spouse
I want to witness before the believing Orthodox Christians that Archbishop John, although he died, is nevertheless alive to all who pray to him with faith as if he were a- live. During his lifetime I considered him to be a saint, and though I knew little, I be- lieved in his prayers and used to ask for

 248 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
his prayers in cases of extreme importance in my life. When he died I at once felt the need to pray to him, and often during church ser- vices in the cathedral would come downstairs into his sepulchre and read the Psalter to him as many used to do. Then many people used to show reverence and cared for him by read- ing the Psalter aloud, which is an ancient pious custom almost forgotten today—to read the Psalter for the dead. It used to be very touching to see some old lady with a candle in her hand, standing in awe before the ana- logion in front of a big old open book, care- fully enunciating complicated long words in the Slavonic Psalter, at times totally incom-
prehensible to anybody.
were understood by the
them and was pleased that a living soul was laboring for him. Many people used to come there and quietly and humbly stand there, patiently waiting their turn to read, listening to the solemn words which mostly referred to
the
One
(Soon
a ukaze put a stop to that, out of fear that people would use that as an excuse to leave the services where he was serving; now no one reads there any more.)
Once I came there and read for a long time until there was no one with me anymore. I looked around and saw that no one would be coming. I was all alone with the Blessed One! And then something deeply touched my heart and I began to weep. I fell on his mantle that covered his dear coffin. And then
world beyond, was listening,
from
where the Blessed to us here below.
than after that the new
ruling
bishop by
But at least they holy one who heard

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 249
suddenly I realized that since he is alive with the Lord and from there he hears us—let him help me in my various needs. And I earnestly began to pray to him for my sister, who wanted very much to get married, but be- cause she had been sick for many years could not find a man close to her heart. Soon the service upstairs had ended and they came down to close the Sepulchre, and I left. That was Sunday night. The next day in the eve- ning my sister told me that she had met a young man and felt that they liked each other. Soon after was their wedding, then a child, and now already for several years they have lived happily together. But the remarkable part of it is that their meeting
took place exactly the very hour prayed to Blessed John about it.
Timothy Salinas,
when I!
Gorokhov May, 1969 California
7.
Mystical Protection at Death or
The Archbishop's Nina
There are some people about whom one knows nothing at all, even though one might see them every day, and when they depart to the other world they are soon forgotten and their memory fades away. Such a one was Nina Khmeleva, or "the Archbishop's Nina," as many in Shanghai called her, since she was always in the cathedral and greatly re- vered Vladika John. Little is known of her.

 250 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
She was completely alone, having no relatives or close ones at all; she had never gotten married, rented a furnished room in a poor part of town, and during her last years was very sick. One remembers that while still in China she went to all the services every day, never missing even one. This labor she con- tinued also in San Francisco; at first she went to the old cathedral, and then to the new. One could often see her at the entrance to the cathedral with a receipt book, col- lecting money for the building of the new cathedral, and it is said that she collected some thousands of dollars in this way. On Thursdays, even when she became sick her- self, she continued to take care of retarded children free of charge. In general, her path in life was a bleak one. She was considered
a little simple-minded, a "blessed one" or something like that. A year before her death she began to lose weight quickly, then she said that she had cancer, and soon she was in the hospital.
The third anniversary of Archbishop John's death drew near, in 1969. A week be- fore her death Nina said that "Vladika is com- ing for me"; but no one attached any signifi- cance to her words. She suffered much and swelled up terribly. But three days before
her death she became
some kind of elder was standing behind her in the corner of the room, all in white. Three times she saw him and asked him whether he had come for her; but he seemed to shake his head in denial.
better and said that

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 251 Then came the morning of the day of
the
commemoration
of Vladika
John's death. In the Sepulchre
under the
cathedral there was
already much movement, the Pontifical Divine Liturgy had begun. At this very time "the Archbishop's Nina" breathed her last in
the hospital, and when her death was re- ported in the Sepulchre, the memorial service was celebrated right after the Liturgy not only for Archbishop John, but also for her. And so it turned out that the first memorial service for her was an "Archbishop's" ser- vice. Truly Vladika John took her to himself, and from that time on she has been commemo- rated in the Sepulchre together with Arch- bishop John every year on the anniversary of
her death. Reported by T. Blinova
8,
Protector of Travellers
EDITOR'S NOTE:
Archbishop
John, in
fulfillment
of his missionary
and archpastoral
duties, travelled by airplane so often and over such long dis- final time when his relics were tances—the
Francisco,
where flown from
Seattle to San
he has been sug- they were
entombed—that
for patron gested as the logical candidate
saint of travellers by air. As the following account reveals, he may be considered also a protector of other travellers. This account was written by a Russian woman who was close to Vladika in Shanghai as well as later and has often asked and received his protec-

 252 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
tion and help. Vladika John used to stop to visit her family whenever travelling by auto- mobile between San Francisco and_ Seattle, and he baptized her husband and children.
On the day of Pascha we_- were returning home to Redding. We left San Francisco after being in church and greeting Archbishop Anthony and our beloved Vladika John. We were hurrying home so as to spend the holy day with my mother, who because of old age and illness could not go to church.
The traffic was
like talking,
changing our
service and
driving the car. Our 7-year-old daughter was playing in the back seat, and I was sitting in
And then I saw that the door seemed to open by my right arm, and Vladika John came out and impatiently called us toward him. The thought came to me—our time has come! At the same time a shadow passed in front of Vladika; it seemed to be the shadow of a priest. I sat up and_e said to myself: "May Thy holy will be done in everything, O Lord!" I opened my eyes and saw that from the left side—from my husband's’ side—a
heavy and apart from.
we did not feel occasionally ex- impressions of the_ splendid the singing. My husband was
front
little,
early
little, and evidently I fell asleep.
beside since in the
my husband.
I
had come morning. I
Volkswagen bus was
froze, and then I
already, or not yet? For some reason I was reconciled to this and felt no panic; and,
I had slept very from the Cathedral
decided to doze a
hurtling toward us. I thought: have we died

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 253
shameful to admit, I did not even think to ask the Lord God to forgive my sins or think to ask His help. The bus flew by us so close that, as the saying goes, if there had been a pancake on one wheel there would have been a colossal catastrophe. When I looked at my husband I saw that he had turned very pale and his hands were shaking, and I knew that we were alive. I sat back again and thanked the Lord for the miraculous deliverance from catastrophe, and here my thoughts turned to the vision of Vladika.
What did it mean? Vladika had called us toward him as if with impatience, as if it were a matter of life or death. But it was I who had seen Vladika, and my husband was driving the car. I had said nothing to him, had not warned him—there had been no time. What did all this mean? At this time my hus- band saw that I wasn't sleeping and told me of our narrow escape. I told him that I knew, that I hadn't been sleeping. "Vladika John woke me up; he warned me." And I told him what I had seen. My husband replied, "But why didn't Vladika warn me, why didn't I see him, and why didn't you tell me anything?" I reflected. True, I had said nothing to him. But how could Vladika have appeared to my
car. knows my since he baptized him. I believe that Vladika inspired
him to turn toward the right side before the oncoming bus began to come toward us. I had seen the oncoming bus and at that mom- ent our car was already at the extreme right
husband—after all, he was
driving the
Besides, I believe
husband better than anyone else,
that
Vladika

 254 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
side of the road. There was no sudden move- ment to the right, and our car was going straight ahead, whereas if one would try to turn in an emergency to avoid a collision, the rear of the car might be closer to the oncoming car.
Viadika had warned us both! I looked at my husband and said: "How do you know that you were not warned?" He didn't argue with me. I think he also believes that Vladika
had helped Pascha!
us on that
marvellous day of
9, Deliverance from Cancer
About Vladika John I know only what I have read in your magazine. Last year, after the 20th of October, my mother was in the hospital with a severe pain in the stomach. I was very upset, fearing that she might have cancer; and then, in the night before the doctor was to tell me the results of the tests, I saw a dream. Many people were standing around a large white church with Russian domes. An old man in white came out of the church with a_ staff and came across the Street straight up to my mother and me. When he came up to us I recognized from his
photograph that it
blessed mother and
woke up. I was not
mother. As it turned out, she had an ulcer
Valentina
Pascha, 1972
Harvey Redding, California
was Vladika me, and I
John. He immediately more about
upset any

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 255
which quickly healed. Now I think often about Vladika." Tamara Hirt
July 25, 1975 Sarnia, Ontario, Canada
EDITOR'S NOTE:
In the articles which Bishop Savva pub-
lished in Orthodox Russia concerning Archbi- shop John, there are a number of dreams similar to this one, and Bishop Savva makes a significant observation after describing one: "One may consider this dream as true, be- cause St. Barsanuphius the Great _ writes that if one sees the cross in a dream, this is a sign that the dream is from God, since satan cannot represent the cross. Of course, other dreams also may be from God, but we do not have such a sure indication that such a dream is from God as we do if we see the sign of the cross in it. And if the dream is from God, one must be careful, says St. Barsanuphius, not to interpret it incorrectly, for here satan can deceive us" (Orthodox
Russia,
1967, no. 3). That
Viladika
John should
make the sign of the
cross’
(while blessing)
in this dream, and
with
it give peace of mind, indicates that this dream also was from God, and was Vladika's grace-given visitation to one who venerates him.
10.
Preservation from a Car Accident
The portraits of Blessed Archbishop John Maximovitch arrived just at the time

 256 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
when we were leaving for Europe. Being somewhat suspicious of how safe our air-~ planes, buses, cars and trains are and trus- ting in the help of well-travelled Blessed John Maximovitch, we were very thankful that we could take his portrait with us on all our journeys. Actually, our friend M. tells us that he was saved from a car accident by a miracle worked by Blessed Archbishop John. M. had been driving in his car at nighttime at considerable speed when an enormous deer appeared at the side of the road and started dashing towards his car. But before the
beast could reach the suddenly stopped, and felt very distinctly the John Maximovitch.
automobile the same
11.
Hope for Departed Non-Orthodox
EDITOR'S The American
becoming
uncertain how to pray for her when he received this answer from Vladika John, which he also interpreted as a sign "that we Should be missionaries and show love and concern for the non-Orthodox around us."
"I was reading in the afternoon from
NOTE:
following incident
is from an died without sorrow and
convert whose mother Orthodox. He was in
The Orthodox Word of May-June, 1974.
First
at
it was time M. presence of Blessed
Michael Nedelsky South Dakota January 12/25, 1974

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 257
I looked at the photo of Vladika John's Sepul- chre. As I did I read again the troparion for him and on finishing was moved to kiss his Sepulchre and said to him how sorry I was that I had not visited it more often in San Francisco when I had been there. I then glanced at a picture of my mother and asked him once again to pray for her, and I felt sure that he was praying for her. Then my eyes began to become heavy, and they closed and I entered into a kind of reverie, during which I saw my mother with her apron on, talking much as she did in the last years of her life. Then suddenly I sensed that Vladika was praying for her. I then saw her again, but this time down on her knees, crying and saying how sorry she was for her sins. She cried so loudly and so bitterly that I could almost hear her actual voice in the room. I was impressed to join Vladika in prayer and not to open my eyes. I began to pray simply but fervently for God to have mercy on her, and I was conscious of Vladika's presence very strongly, though I did not see him as I did my mother. She continued to cry with great sorrow and finally disappeared. Soon I saw Vladika John, but only from the back.
I could not see his face, only the veil of his kKamilavka and the side of his beard, then the top of his episcopal staff and the sleeve of his rasson. He began to slowly walk away, and I noticed clearly that he wore a plain black monk's mantle rather than an episcopal one. He then slowly exited with dignity and I never saw his face, but I was sure it was he. I then opened my eyes, arose, and again

 258 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
recited his troparion aloud, facing East, and kissed the photo of his Sepulchre.
"I do not know the full meaning of what I experienced... One thing I note is that Vladika said nothing and made no promises. I was simply assured of his prayers and of the need of my own and others'. I also note that he wore a monk's mantle and _ staff, rather than episcopal mantle and staff. This would indicate to me that he did what he did in a private capacity rather than as a bishop in official capacity, which would mean that he affirms the Church's prohibition of offering public prayers for departed non-Orthodox,
but also affirms the prayers for them are should be encouraged."
teaching that private
12.
Reminder to Pray for the Dead
"Here is something I have not yet re- lated to you, but about the deeds of saints one must inform the whole world. Several years ago, when I was in great sorrow, the late Vladika John (Maximovitch) appeared to me in a dream. I saw in the middle of our church a coffin, and in it Vladika John lying in his mantle. Vladika crossed himself, got up, and said to me: 'Pray for the slave of God Basil (who had died several years be- fore) and for ...' (someone whose name could not make out, but later I figured out
of
great value and
Joseph McKean Youngstown, Ohio September 6, 1974
I

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 259
that this was our roomer Eugene who had died)."
Alexander Pernitz San Francisco, California December 14, 1975
13.
Healing of an Ulcer
"My mother has an ulcer that cannot be
operated on, and has had
past three years. In 1975
pitalized three times. She
violently ill at night, and the next day would be in the hospital. She would then lie in bed and take feeding by arm; in a few days she would come home.
"But in November of 1975 she was hit by another attack, and this time she had a fever of about 102 degrees or so (she is a small person and her normal temperature is 96). They said she could come home when the fever broke. My mother does not believe in God and His mercy, but this time she asked me to pray for her, and I said would. She had lain in bed for seven days, and the doctors said they couldn't bring it down. So I received a_ piece of Vladika's mantle from a friend who knew the Blessed Archpastor. She told me to give my mother a piece of artos and holy water, and then to place a piece of mantle on her forehead and ask for Vladika to pray for us. I left her in the late afternoon and she then fell asleep, and the next day she was without the fever. In a day she was released and has been in
trouble for the
she was would
hos- become
I

 260 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
good health ever since. The faithful all re- joiced in the miracle."
Peter Herrin Burlingame, California February 2, 1976
14.
Help in Stopping Bleeding
"In the night into January 1, n.s., after praying to Blessed Vladika John Maxim- ovitch and applying some oil from the lamp burning in his Sepulchre, on arising from sleep on January lst I found that the bleed-
ing which days had His Saints!"
I had been stopped. Our
experiencing for two Lord is glorified in
Marina Prokopchuk
15.
‘‘Pray for the Sick’’
"This past Monday evening I about Blessed Vladika John
dream
Francisco, which I shall never forget
as I shall live. It was the sort of a dream
that I wished would not end, and
with such joy and
unworthy that he
dream. Blessed Vladika had on his
and his panagia. He was bent over looking at me sort of sideways, his hair was black with streaks of grey hair, and he had taken off his glasses and said that he was happy for
happiness, and should come to
I awoke
I felt so
New January,
Jersey 1976
had a
of
as long
me in cassock
a
San

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 261
my ordination as a Deacon, and also he said: "]: am very happy also that you often pray for the sick during the services. Do not for- get the sick, always pray for them, and visit them.'; and I said, 'Yes, Vladika, I will.' Then T., our parishioner, said to _ him, ‘Would you please tell me about some of the lives of the Saints from Ireland?'—for it pleased T. that Vladika in his earlier days
had brought
Saints of the West. So Vladika and T. began to talk. And that was the end of the dream. Never in my life has anything more joyous ever happened to me. Before the dream I had been unemployed for over nine weeks, but the day after the dream I was hired... It is so necessary to pray to these blessed people who have loved Christ and His Church so much, and at the same time to do the things that they have done while they were on the
earth (but I believe that in spirit they are
still
how
visit
them very often."
read about to go and pray for
to attention the pre-schism
here). How often have we
Blessed Vladika
the sick, care for
used them and
John
16.
Call to Orthodoxy
"]; have included here a note which I had written back in 1972:
"Today a friend of mine, F.C., a Roman Catholic, told me of a dream he had last
Fr. Dimitry Serfes Endicott, New York January 9, 1976

 262 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
night. Yesterday I told him that when he goes to San Francisco next week he should stop at the Russian Synodal cathedral and get some oil from the lamp on John Maximo- vitch's grave for me. He told me his dream last night: when he went to the cathedral, he started taking oil from the lamp in huge quantities, and then he heard a voice saying, "Tell M. to come here himself and get the oil." F. also told me he started to make the sign of the Cross in the Orthodox fashion, but was told he held his fingers improperly. He corrected this and then woke up in bed, making the sign of the Cross correctly in the Orthodox manner. His roommate, a Budd- hist, asked him what he was doing, and F. just looked at him and said, "praying." Just thought I'd write this down—who knows? Is John Maximovitch a saint?!
"Later I travelled to San Francisco and went directly to the tomb after Divine Litur- gy. I prayed at Vladika John's relics asking his forgiveness for previous skepticism of his sanctity... It means a lot to me that Vladika John brought me into the Synod and to San
Francisco in particular relics."
San
to be near his holy
Michael Riggin Francisco, California April 27, 1976
I Archbishop
to you
17. Miracles in France
have the pleasure of communicating two miracles which occurred through
John.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 263
On January 6, 1958, at about 10 a.m., an Orthodox French man and woman, on their way to the Convent at Fourqueux where the Archbishop was going to officiate, were the victims of a very serious automobile accident, and they were taken, the man being uncon- scious, to the Hospital of St. Germain.
The man—myself—having been thrown from the automobile by a fortunate chance (the door having opened, while the dashboard had caved in on my seat), had both his knees broken, his ribs crushed, his head and stomach severely bruised. After ten days in the hospital there had been no movement of the bowels, and on the tenth morning he was as one abandoned; everything having been attempted to this end, the basin stood beside him unused.
In the meantime, a sister from Four- queux whom the Archbishop had assigned to visit him, brought him a small blessed bread. Out of respect he began to eat this bread... with appetite. A half-hour later his intestines were liberated of their burden; the _ basin was near, so that everything could be taken care of properly.
The woman, Madame
several fractures in her
After being operated
blood, was no longer able to urinate, and was in a comatose state. The second day, towards 1 p.m., Archbishop John paid her a visit. As soon as she saw him, she felt herself illumin- ated, with the impression that God was approaching her—of which she informed him. He took her hands and held them for a long
Pauline Richet, had right arm and leg. on, she _ lost much

 264 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
moment without saying anything. The next morning, on the third day, she urinated, spit out and blew out through the nose clots of blood. She understood that she had _ been saved. (These are the words of Madame Richet herself, who has just telephoned me. She likewise is happy to express’ her gratitude to Archbishop John.)
Archbishop John visited many _ sick people, but he always did so very humbly and discreetly. His good deeds in this regard remain unknown.
Some visitors, during a meeting with him when he was in Versailles, saw his head and shoulders surrounded by a blue halo.
Emile Moine June 27, 1973
Paris,
18.
Healing of Asthma
France
Among the thousands who knew and loved Archbishop John was the family of Bor- is Troyan, who had been very close to him since the 1930's in Shanghai. This family lived in the refugee camp in the Philippines before eventually coming to the U.S. The oldest boy of this family had been known by Vladika since the boy was born. Circumstan- ces caused the family to be separated from Vladika for a number of years. The eleven- year-old boy became afflicted with violent attacks of asthma about 1952. He was put un- der the care of a physician, and standing ar- rangements were made _ so that the _ doctor

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 265
could be called immediately, day or night, when the boy, Vitaly T., suffered attacks of asthma. The family had been in San Francisco for about three years when Vladika John came to visit his former parishioners after a Synod meeting in New York City. When the family learned of his coming, they went immediately to St. Tikhon's Church to see him. As Vladi- ka arrived and stepped out of the car, the people surged forward to greet their beloved Archbishop. He greeted everyone, many of whom he had not seen for several years. The family had not seen him for three years or more. He asked them what was new with them; they replied that everything was fine except for the boy's asthma. Vladika seemed startled to hear about it. He grabbed the boy by the hair, one of his well-known gestures toward the boys who served him in Church,
and very asthma
looking
right?"
time until the more asthma.
abruptly said, "He has never had
and never
at the boy, he
And the boy said, present, the
"Yes." From that
will have asthma!" And said, "Isn't that
Reader
San Francisco,
Campbell California
19.
The Closeness of Saints
My first meeting with Vladika John was evoked by great need—a serious illness. In 1953, in New York City, I underwent an un- successful operation on my left eye, which
boy
has had no
Laurence
January, 1974

 266 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
had a cataract. For several months I was threatened by blindness. Finally I was again
placed
"Shock"
almost
open the eye. But here a new misfortune ap- peared: glaucoma... Again I was given an operation to remove the liquid which had ac- cumulated inside the eye, and I was told that such an operation would have to be repeated every year.
It should be added that both in the beginning, when the inflammation started, and later with the increase of pressure inside the eye, this affliction was accompanied by intolerable pains which deprived me of sleep and the ability to work. And all this time our economic condition was extremely sad.
In such arrival from
in the hospital treatment, as died. But after
and given so-called a result of which |
this "shock" I could
circumstances, hearing of the Europe of Archbishop John, we Synodal church where he was After the service, my husband led
went to the
serving.
me up to Vladika. I briefly told him about my misfortune and asked his holy prayers. To my astonishment, Vladika, who did not know me in the least, when blessing me called me by name. After the blessing which I re- ceived from Vladika, I went to the hospital for the operation, completely at peace. And by God's mercy, by the prayers of the holy Vladika, this was the last operation I had: I have not needed them for over 17 years now.
After this we included Vladika John in the number of those clergymen and laymen for whose health we prayed when performing our daily rule of prayer.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 267
However, after the passage of a certain time, in connection with the extreme exhaus- tion of my husband, we had to think of ab- breviating our rule of prayer. The thought came to lessen the number of persons whom we commemorated, both living and dead. The enemy instilled in me the thought of saying to my husband: "Vladika John is a holy man and does not need our unworthy prayers."
In the evening we did not commemorate Vladika John, as also certain other persons whom we had commemorated previously.
After praying, I lay down to sleep. I had hardly succeeded in dozing off when suddenly, either in sleep or in actual fact I saw Vladika John (who at that time was in Europe), in his black mantle with a cross in his right hand. I went up to him with joy to receive his blessing, but he said to me: "No, you do not need me now, and I will not bless you. When you needed me, I_ blessed you, and if you will need me sometime in the
future, then come to
me _ for blessing."
And with blessing me.
these
words
Vladika left
without
sleep,
Of course I could no longer and all the time I thought
go to of my unworthiness, the wondrous deeds of God and
of the teaching of the Apostle Paul that we should pray for all instructors and for each other.
In the morning with fear I related to my husband concerning my dream or vision, and from that time we have not ceased, and will not cease to commemorate Vladika John, as before among the living, and now for his

 268 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
repose, entreating the Lord that He, by the prayers of our holy Vladika, might save and have mercy upon us sinners.
Some time after this incident we heard that Vladika John had arrived and would
at the Church of the Holy Archangel
serve
Michael
husband. I was afraid to go up to Vladika to receive his blessing. However, Vladika looked at me kindly and blessed me with joy.
O Holy Vladika, pray for us sinners before the Throne of the Almighty, that He might not leave us, but might strengthen us in faith and patience to bear our crosses to the end of our days, and to oppose with sob- riety the corrupting spirit of apostasy which is so widely spread by the predecessors of Antichrist in our days.
Maria Mostiko Forefeast of Transfiguration
August 5/18, 1973 Washington, D.C.
20.
Healing of Arthritis
I will tell you how Viadika John healed me. I suffer from heart trouble, high blood
in Brooklyn.
I went there with my
pressure, and arthritis.
until, two and
took hold of my
unbearable. I couldn't
down, and I did my
The whole time I prayed to the
God and begged Her to deliver me from these torments.
a half whole
It was years
all ago,
in
tolerable arthritis pain was
chest. move my housework
The arms
or bend torment.
Mother of

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 269
And it was not long before help came to me, sinful and unworthy one. I saw a dream. I was walking on a road and carrying before me a cross; it was an old one and had become quite yellow, but here I saw that it was shining like new (it was the size of the palm of a hand). Then I saw coming up to me a monk with a staff in his hands. When he reached me he said to me: "Here you are all the time praying to the Mother of God to help you, but you are not the only one who suffers; be patient and wait."
Here I woke up and thought for a long time as to what this dream might mean. I de- cided that evidently this is pleasing to God and I should be patient. In a few days I re- ceived a letter from a friend whom I! had written about my pains. She told me that I should write to the Batiushka who serves in the cathedral where the Sepulchre of Vladika John is located. I wrote him a letter and sent money, asking him to serve a panikhida for Vladika John and to pray for me. Batiushka fulfilled my request and sent me a little icon of the Mother of God, a little cross from Jer- usalem, some cotton dipped in oil from the lamp that burns in the Sepulchre of Vladika John, and most important—his portrait. As soon as I saw it, I immediately recognized the monk whom I had seen in the dream—and I had never seen him while he was alive, you know. I burst into tears and began to thank
mercy to me. I began to Vladika to pray for me. I
the Lord
pray and
confessed
entreat the Lord to forgive me and grant me
for His to ask
my sins to him,
begging him to

 270 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
remission of sins and healing of soul ang body. With the cotton I anointed my chest and fervently prayed.
After this I became gradually
and better. The pain became weaker,
heart felt better, and my blood pressure be- gan to fall. And so, after two and a half years of pain in my chest, it passed away entirely—and the whole time, because of my heart, I had been under a physician's care, and no matter what he gave me or advised, nothing helped. But by the prayers of Vladi- ka John, the Lord healed me. I gave a pro- mise to send money for candles or oil to his Sepulchre every year for the day of Vladika's repose, which I will do until the Lord calls me to Himself. My friend Olga Alexandrovna Makarova also was healed of arthritis, but that was during Vladika's lifetime. It was she who advised me to turn to him.
I have written you everything, as God
is my witness! have intercessors Pure Méther!
What good fortune
that we His Most
before
God and
21.
Healing of Injured Fingers
One Saturday I went to visit an old American lady-friend, now reposed, who lived in an old-age home and could move around only in a wheel-chair. She was entirely alone and my visits always gave her great joy. I
Zukulis February 15, 1977
Sofia Milwaukee, Wisconsin
better my

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS
271
always
very hot, and
hour.
ready to go home, again in the intense heat. But I managed to ask a woman who was visit- ing her mother to take me, even though it wasn't at all on her way.
brought
her sweets. The I had to travel for
day was about an to get
Having
sat with her, I began
She drove me to my apartment, and so as not to detain her I quickly got out of the automobile, and in my haste I closed the door on three fingers of my right hand. The pain
was very intense
and the woman _ became immediately ran into the blood, extreme pain, and
frightened, house. There immediately
but was
I
the joints of the three fingers up immensely and turned blue. I
swelled
thought
I couldn't bend them.
were broken, since
that the fingers
I should tell you that I work as a pian- ist in a ballet school and play many hours every day. I thought that I would be unable to work for a long time or might even lose my job, and I was terrified. And so, with tears I turned for help to Vladika John with these words: "You see, Vladika, what hap- pened to my hand. During your lifetime you loved to visit the sick. I also love to visit the sick very much, and now I can lose my job." In tears I fell asleep, after placing the ailing hand on his portrait. I woke up in the morning—and I couldn't recognize my own hand. The swelling had gone down, the color was normal, and there was only a barely no-
ticeable pain when whole day Sunday asked for complete
I bent the I thanked healing.
On
fingers. The Vladika and
Monday no

 272 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
trace at all remained, and I played without hindrance for many hours. From that time I thank Vladika every day and pray for the re- pose of his soul. I would like to live to see his canonization.
Nina Pashchenko Birmingham, Alabama
May 27, 1977
22.
Deliverance from a Skin Growth
Christ Is Risen! Indeed He Is Risen! Dear Fathers,
With prayers of thanksgiving to the Risen Christ, He Who works miracles through His Saints, I write to you this account:
For several years I have had a_ skin growth on the side of my neck. It started out as a pinpoint bump and had increased in size and length until it was about 1/8 inch in dia- meter and 3/8 inch long. A year and a half ago I was forced to remove my cross and neck chain because the chain would cut into this growth, make it bleed and cause me much pain. I put my cross and chain away in a dresser drawer. It bothered me not to have Christ's cross around my neck, and at times I thought about having the growth sur- gically removed. But I was confronting other trials and tribulations and this just seemed a part of it all. Instead, through prayer and fasting, I tried to better my inner self rather than my external shell.
While ordering icon prints from a book- store in California, I also saw _ something

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 273
about "free" oil from the Sepulchre of Arch- bishop John Maximovitch. So out of curiosity I ordered some of this oil. At that time I had no idea who this man was or what he did, or anything at all about him. My order was de- layed for some time (this being the will of God). However, during this time I started to hear things about this Archbishop John—his pious life, his works, his deeds, his healings and about this oil and how it should be used. A genuine feeling of respect began to grow in my heart for this man.
By this time, with all my love I was asking for the Archbishop's prayers, and was also praying for his blessed repose. In prayer I told the Archbishop that beginning with the first day of Lent I would anoint my neck growth with his oil, and I asked that he beseech the Lord to remove it from me. So for the few days that remained before Lent I prayed:
Please remember me, Archbishop
you know how much I want to wear my cross
again. Pray for me,
wonderworker, take away this growth that keeps me from wearing the Life-giving Cross of our Saviour.
On Monday night, March 13, 1978, after I had said my evening prayers in my icon corner, I took the oil from the shelf, put some on my finger, and for the first time I anointed my neck in the area of the growth. I didn't feel it! How strange, I instantly thought, that I should miss the spot. But how could I miss it? It's been with me for so long. I stepped away from the
God-pleaser. Blessed
John,

 274 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
corner to a wall mirror to check, but the vigil light was insufficient to see by. My heart was beating fast. I rushed to the bathroom, put on the light and checked my neck. The growth was gone! There was_ no blood, no scab, no pain. With tears I went back to my icon corner’ and_ thanked Archbishop John Maximovitch.
Soon after I had a Panikhida said for Blessed John's repose. For this service I put my cross back on for the first time in well over a year. Now each time I touch this cross I thank Blessed John, and I will pray for him always.
For your information I am 33 years old, married and the father of two children.
As God is my witness, what I have written here is the truth.
Peter A. Terasowich
831 Milford Pt. Road Milford, Connecticut 06460
23.
Help for the Paralyzed
Dear Fathers,
Having read the "Chronicle of the Ven-
eration of Archbishop John of Shanghai," I cannot be silent. My father, Herbert Klin- gart, on November 2, 1977, suffered a bad stroke and was paralyzed without conscious- ness for five days. In December there was a consultation of twelve physicians. They stated and signed that he would not be able to speak or to walk, and said, "Be prepared for the worst."

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 275
I flew to San Francisco and prayed at the tomb of Archbishop John. Thanks to Bor- is Troyan I received a prosphora, and his wife gave me a chocolate Christmas tree orna- ment from the Sepulchre, and they placed a little piece of paper with my father's name on it under the mitre of Archbishop John.* Soon
he was able to
get up, and every
day he became better.
At Christmas
he was
brought home from the
hospital for
a visit,
and in January he was
already playing
chess, and could understand and speak. I took photos of him and showed them to the physicians. They said that they did not understand this and could not explain it, that this must be a mir- acle... Now he already walks by himself.
What a good fortune that Vladika John is with us, and through him our prayers reach up to the Lord God.
Nonna Katzenstein 2551 W. Campbell Ave. La Habra, California 90631
March 28, 1978
24.
Diverting of a Hurricane
At the end of August, 1979, Hurricane "David" formed in the Atlantic Ocean. This hurricane had winds with a velocity in excess of 100 miles per hour, and caused great des-
*A tradition from old Russia, done when people entreat the prayers of a holy hierarch at his tomb.

 276 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER truction and death in the Dominican Republic.
From the this hurricane, moving towards
direction of the
it was Miami,
movement of that it was
September 1, there was no longer any doubt of this. On Sunday, September 2, orders were given by the local authorities to evacu-
ate
the
story
in the morning the radios and newspapers an- nounced that "the hurricane has spared" Mia- mi and passed by.
The author of this present note was at that time in Miami and would like to clarify how all this happened.
On Sunday, September 2, after the Lit- urgy in the Orthodox Church of St. Vladimir in Miami, the priest served a panikhida for Archbishop John. When Russians had _ been staying on the island of Tubabao (in the
ocean shore, hotels. On
where there were multi- September 3, Monday, early
After the panikhida
for Vladika, Hurricane
evident
Florida. On Saturday,
the part of the population residing on
years ago), thanks of Vladika John
to the the ty-
Philippines thirty
ceaseless prayers
phoons usual for
This was even noted by the local inhabitants, who often saw Vladika praying at night and signing the camp with the sign of the Cross. Once in the Philippines a powerful typhoon was heading in the direction of the camp. By the prayers of Vladika John, near the island the typhoon changed direction and did not hit the camp.
This same miracle occurred in Florida.
this place
did not occur.
"David,"
north and passed by. Thus, by the prayers
approaching
Miami, suddenly turned

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 277
of Vliadika John even after his death, the Lord spared the inhabitants of this city.
May the Lord give rest to the soul of His departed servant, Archbishop John, and by his prayers have mercy on us!
(Translated 20, p. 16.)
from Orthodox
K.K.M. Miami, Florida September 3, 1979
Russia, 1979, no.
25.
Help for a Sufferer of Rheumatism
Up to now I have not written about the diseases of myself and my relatives of which holy Vladika John healed us. I will do so now. I can affirm under oath the exactness and truth of my words.
In 1953 rheumatism.
Holy Trinity
there was the opening of the Sobor of Bish- ops, which Vladika John attended.
My sister Sophia went up to Vladika and asked him to pray for the sick Olga (my- self) and Lydia. Lydia is our niece who lives in Australia. She had become ill and had been placed in a hospital. On the very first night (after this) my pains began to decrease, and in about three days I was completely well and did not have to begin taking the pills which had been prescribed for me by the doctor, and which I had bought for nine dollars.
On
I began October Monastery
to be tormented by 9 (of that year) in
(Jordanville, N.Y.)

 278 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Judging by the letters from Australia, Lydia also at this very same time became completely well, to the astonishment of the doctors.
In the winter of the following year, 1954, I again became ill with rheumatism of the joints and muscles, and on February 5 I entered the hospital. On this same day I sent a letter to Viladika and asked him to pray for me. To the letter, on a separate sheet, I added my confession, since I had read that St. John of Kronstadt, before praying for the healing of the sick, prayed for the remission of their sins. I enumerated all the sins I could remember. I repented also of my sin of smoking. I was especially tormented by the fact that I smoked when I was sewing vest- ments; I was sewing vestments for the first time in my life and therefore was very upset.
I had never dared to ask Vladika to heal me of this vice; I had smoked for 27 years and could not give it up for anything.
Lying in the hospital and receiving no letter from Vladika, I thought that Vladika had not forgiven me my sins; and the pain did not cease. At this time I received a letter from Germany from a certain disabled veteran
who
had
and
calmed me and gave me hope that Vladika had not yet received my letter.
On March 7, Forgiveness Sunday, I was brought home from the hospital. I was still completely sick and weak. However, on Tues- day, March 9 (new style), I suddenly became much better, in fact so well that I even got
wrote that stopped on
Vladika his way
had been in Italy, through Germany,
then was
returning
to France. This

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 279 up from bed. I improved every day and could
even do some housework. On Friday
ceived a letter from Vladika and felt myself completely well. At the same time I had ob- tained an aversion for smoking. Here is a copy of the letter of Vladika John:
"Finding of the Precious Head of St. John the Forerunner
February 24 (March 9), 1954
"Suffering Olga:
May the Lord help you and heal you. The Lord permits our sufferings in or-
der that we might feel our weakness and strive more fervently towards the Source of every good thing, our Creator Who gives ev- eryone what is profitable.
May the Lord strengthen you.
I have prayed for you and will pray at the Liturgy.
May the Lord also forgive you all your transgressions.
Go to confession and receive communion of the Holy Mysteries.
May the blessing of the Lord be with you and with your sister Sophia.
May God also help the sick Gaida.
Your
Archbishop John"
At the same time on February 5, when asking Vladika to pray for me, I had written also about my niece Gaida, a Latvian, asking him to pray for her also. She had tuberculo- sis. She was in a sanatorium, and the doctors had said that she should not have children.
I re-

 280 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
By the prayers of Vladika she
became well and has a son 18 years old and a daughter 14. They are both well.
Olga Makarova
EDITOR'S NOTE:
The above-mentioned Sophia is a physi-
cian by profession, and is a witness of these miraculous healings.
26.
The Healing Oil
Thank you ever so much for sending the healing oil from our dear Vladyka's Sep- ulchre. May God speed the day when our beloved Vladyka shall be glorified among the saints of God!
We wish to report that my mother used the oil on a small sore-scar she had on her face. The scar had not gone away with any other treatment. Within two days of using the oil, the scar was completely gone and the surrounding area almost completely healed! I myself am using the oil for a sore on my foot. After three days, the sore has now closed and appears to be healing also!
Yours in Christ, Vladimir Raasch
St. Paul,
27.
An Infection Abated
Minnesota April, 1981
Having read with much interest and spiritual happiness, the book Blessed John, I

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 281
would like to add my personal testimonial of a miraculous occurrence of healing through the fervent prayers and intercession of Archbish- op John.
In 1963 I was transferred by my em- ployer from San Francisco to Portland, Ore- gon. And so, in March I moved to Oregon together with my wife, son, and two daugh- ters.
While in San Francisco, our family be- came quite close to the Church and Vladika John. Our son Vova (Vladimir) was an aco- lyte at the cathedral; my wife wrote articles in the Good Tidings (a weekly, edited by Archbishop John); and I served on the Par- ish Council.
Soon after our arrival in Portland, my wife had major surgery which initially ap-
peared
while on
and her
Viadika was on a trip to Europe at this time, I nevertheless sent him a telegram on my wife's behalf.
The next day two miraculous things oc- curred: 1) We received a telegram acknowled- ging that Archbishop John was praying for my wife Tatiana, and 2) the infection abated and her condition greatly improved—with sub- sequent complete recovery.
Alexei Kochneff-Kennedy October, 1981
successful. That night,
however, developed, Although
IV, a serious condition became
infection critical.

 282 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
28.
Deliverance from Meningitis
Dear Father,
Here is the translation of the miracles
that Archbishop John cuse me, please, for will do my best.
has worked here. Ex- the translation, but I
My little niece, two
years old, lay in bed with a high fever. The doctor came again and again, but nothing helped her. He made the decision that she must be hospitalized. The doctor specialist stated immediately that she had severe meningitis. The chance of re- covery was very small, and if there was a recovery, she would suffer great damage.
It was Saturday evening. With great ‘sorrow we went to the church for the Al-
night Vigil. During the office we prayed to Vladika John. We promised that if she was
healed, we would burn a perpetual lamp be- fore his icon. For the doctors it was a big surprise that on Sunday morning the little child was without fever, and she healed total- ly so that there was no damage at all. Since then, the perpetual lamp before Vladika John's icon is burning in the church of the convent.
A friend, who is a Roman priest, had heard of the holy life of our Archbishop John. He asked for a photograph of him. One day a nurse came to him who was addicted to morphine. She was married and had child- ren. She asked the priest to help her. She

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 283
had tried everything to be delivered from the addiction, but it was all in vain. She had also made many pilgrimages, but without success. The priest gave her the photograph of Vladika John and told her that she must have faith.
The next morning, she took out all the morphine and the money that she had hidden, and she gave it all to her husband. She stopped definitely with it and she has no more need of it. (She told that in the night Archbishop John had come to her and that they had a little talk. "Those eyes," she said, "those eyes..."
Pray for us, holy fathers, member you all in our prayers.
as we re-
29.
Relief from Eye and Stomach Pain
I thank you ever so much for sending my daughter and me the photo of Father Ser- aphim with your blessings written thereon, and all the other Orthodox publications, and, of course, the oil from the Sepulchre of St. John Maximovitch.
Father Herman, I want to tell you of some of the miraculous experiences I have had when I have called on St. John Maximo- vitch. I have a slightly enlarged heart and also suffered for years with high blood pres- sure, insomnia, headaches and considerable trouble with my eyes. Numerous times rain- bow colored lights moved about in my vision,
Hieromonk Netherlands,
Thomas 1983

 284 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
making me sick. I had to lie down, but when I lay down, I felt worse because the bed and room appeared to me to turn upside down. The severe headaches would follow. My head felt as if it was going to burst. I even thought I could be dying. (Once, my blood pressure was so high that the doctor was amazed I was still alive, and told my brother so.) Then one day my daughter Garifallia and
I received
your gift
knew how
moved you to send it to us. Both of us started praying to St. John Maximovitch and each and every time I called on him, I received help. I will tell you about two of those times.
One day when I was having those sick- ening symptoms with my eyes, I called Gari- fallia to get for me the oil from the Sepulchre of St. John Maximovitch. (We had the oil from Father Innocent of Tucson, Arizona, who sent it to us after we had read the book and had asked him whom we should write to to get some. He replied that a pilgrim, who had been to the cathedral, passed by Tucson and had given the oil to him.) With a prayer to
God and to St. John Maximovitch, my daugh- ter applied the oil on my eyeballs, and im- mediately I felt a coolness in my eyeballs (something I had never felt before), and the
pains and multi-colored and my headache stopped.
lights disappeared,.
from you and Father Seraphim
of the book, much we
"Blessed John." God needed this book and
Another time I was suddenly stricken with very sharp pains in my stomach. The pains were so severe that I cried from them,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 285
and this lasted for three hours. I prayed to St. John Maximovitch with all my heart for his help. I lay down in my bed and looked at the clock as I did so. I did not sleep, but just lay there with my eyes closed, won- dering what was going to happen to me. Then I looked at the clock again and saw that
twenty minutes had passed, and I could hard- ly believe the change that had come over me, for suddenly I felt a lightness in my body, all my pains had vanished, and I felt fine. With tears I thanked God and St. John Max- imovitch. I lit a candle for him.
I want to share these experiences with you and others. Every morning when I say my prayers, including those ‘to Our Most Ho- ly Mother of God and to St. Nectarios, I add prayers to our beloved St. John Maximovitch. During the time of these prayers I have a picture of St. John Maximovitch before me. It is the picture of him in his liturgical vestments.
How marvellous are our Wonderful God's works!
I close with reverence,
Yours in Christ, Mrs. Koumbo Pessimisi 2637-1 Dallas, N.E, Albuquerque, New Mexico August 4/17, 1983
30.
Help for a Broken Hip
Thanks for another bottle of "Healing Oil from the Sepulchre of our God-Beloved

 286 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Vladika John." Truly his intercession is great before the throne of our Most High God.
My mother fell and broke her hip on the 12th of December of 1981. She is past 83 years old. After she came home, she said that -she had little or no feeling in her left leg and foot. I put the healing oil on her leg and foot and prayed to Blessed John. She now says she can wiggle her toes, which she couldn't do before and she has more feeling in both feet and legs. I also used oil on my ears as I had trouble with them. Now no more trouble.
I hope that the day comes very soon when our Beloved John will be glorified.
Robert Hall Montana
January, 1981
31.
Help in Finding Things
Dear Reverend Fathers:
While living at the St. Herman of Alaska
Monastery, In February, 1982, I accompanied Hieromonk Seraphim of thrice-blessed memory to Redding, California, where he gave a lec- ture at the St. Herman of Alaska Winter Pil- grimage and celebrated the Divine Liturgy the following day on the Feast of the Meeting of the Lord at the Surety-of-Sinners Mission Pa- rish.
Shorly after Liturgy on the day of the Feast, Father Seraphim sent me together with several brothers to buy supplies and groce- ries for the monastery, entrusting me with

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 287
$150. Having brought a full shopping cart to the checkstand, I suddenly realized that I didn't have the money. I was shocked, felt terrible that I had lost the money, and pro-
ceeded to blame and reproach
everyone and mentally. We Seraphim told
everything else
vocally and and Father
phoned the
us to return. When we had
church
parked in the towards’ the met Father Seraphim alone half-
driveway, I
church and
way, and he said, "You have it right there," pointing to my chest. "Archbishop John told me. You didn't think of praying to him, did you?" With self-assurance I felt my chest and with simultaneous joy and shame I found the money in a pocket which I thought I had cer- tainly searched, and, startled, I replied that, indeed, I hadn't prayed to Viladika John. Fa- ther Seraphim then comforted me, explaining that after we had finished speaking on the phone, he had gone immediately to church on the left side of which there is a large por-
started walking
trait of Archbishop John together with his mitre and several other portraits and relics associated with his life and person and there he had asked Vladika John to help us find the money. Archbishop John informed him that I had the money right in my pocket—un- der my very nose! Thus, through the inter- cession of God's righteous ones, a sure trial and temptation was transformed into a revela- tion of the mystery of holiness and grace.
Riassaphore-Monk Gerasim Eliel New Valaam Monastery Spruce Island, Alaska
February, 1984

 288 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
32.
Relief from a Spinal Deformation
As long as I can remember, I have had or been in some kind of physical pain or ache. Sometimes it is not so much; sometimes it is a lot. Last July, the pain became close to unbearable when my neck and back mus-~- cles went into "spasm" and my body became quite rigid and painful. Although I have al- ways had back pain and stiffness, and a cou- ple of times it had hurt very badly, this was the worst ever. I even went to a chiropractor who was "very concerned" about the condition of my body; his diagnosis was very bleak in- deed. But I could not bring myself to begin thrice-weekly chiropractic visits—it seemed like giving in and giving up, and the cost was very high. I finally decided to let God heal me or deal with the pain as the reper- cussion of my sins, as it would be. At that time, despite my fears of being always in pain and maybe crippled or incapacitated someday, I still did not do as I knew I should—establish an earnest prayer life, make myself "tow the line," so to speak, and combat sloth. Physically; I was very sore and stiff and hurting. When I got up in the
morning,
I
could hardly
walk on could
or move
and feet, stand
only
legs,
nor
began
somewhat. This continued for quite some
could hips kneel to
hobble and back. through
slowly I
painful
neither
the church
sleep more, which did help
services. I

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 289 time, and I began to spend more time in my
room being quiet to avoid tiredness.
On November 16, 1985,
the pain and
a Saturday, candles, and I
stood almost all day
could hardly move because I was so tight and stiff and in so much pain. We were to have a special prayer service that night for St. Her- man of Alaska and I wanted to go. After cleaning up from candlemaking I went to our room (my husband's and mine, but he was away) and lay on the floor for a few minutes, which usually helped the pain and stiffness, so I could go to prayers. I was still in a lot of pain and was stiff, but I decided to force myself to the chapel anyway. So I limped ov- er; but after climbing the stairs, I just could not bring myself to climb the next flight and stay in the chapel for an hour or so. There were not many people there, which influenced my decision because I would not have been able to hide my discomfort with only a few people in the chapel. So I asked for forgive- ness and thought that at least I could read about St. Herman in my room during the prayer service, and in that way would not be turning my back on him completely.
dipping
I could not find the book we have about St. Herman and figured there would be some- thing about him in the early issues of Ortho- dox America that we have. So I took the first several years worth of copies to my room to read. There was not anything about St. Her- man in the issues I had, but there was a great deal about Blessed John Maximovitch; and I read all about him with interest and in-
I

 290 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
spiration. I was very touched’ through reading about him. When I was done reading and decided to retire for the evening, I found that I was still in a great deal of pain all over, but especially in my feet, legs, hips, back and shoulders; and I felt so frustrated and desperate. I did not know how much more or longer I could stand the pain and stiffness. I noticed a bottle of oil on the dresser where our cross and icons are—a bottle of oil from the lamp by Blessed John Maximovitch's tomb which my husband had been using to anoint a sick brother—and in my desperation and having just read about Blessed John, I figured I would give it a try. I cannot say it was a conscious act of faith; it was more of a plea. I put the oil on all of my body that hurt (except my feet, because I thought it would only rub off on the floor). At that point, I figured that Rev. S. might not like my using all the oil, but I did not care so much because of the pain. I prayed to Blessed John, hoping that he would help me and that I was not being disrespect- ful, for I knew my lack of faith. Then I went to sleep, "at the end of my rope," so to speak.
I awoke very early the next morning and was amazed and incredulous, to say the least, because there was no pain! I moved a- round—still no pain, no tension, no stiffness anywhere. All the way through me—way down inside—there was no pain, and I could hardly believe it. I had not felt that way in so long that I could not remember—I could have leapt for joy. It was a miracle to me that I could

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 291 feel so good and be so free from pain and in
movement. I could
the services, and
Thanksgiving Day,
washed dishes after a meal prepared for 200 people and still I felt wonderful after it all. It was wonderful! —A miraculous healing for me.
I was afraid to tell anyone lest the healing and freedom from pain would go away and because it was a cherished and personal experience. (In retrospect, I think also be- cause I had tried to hide from everyone that I was in so much pain—I had always taken pride in the fact that I worked hard despite the pain and covered it up.) But finally, I had to tell Rev. S.—partially out of joy and partially because I had used the oil without his permission. That is when he told me to write an account down and send it to The Or-
thodox Word.
In the couple of weeks that followed,
sometimes I would feel stiff or a twinge of pain, but underneath it all was the strong assurance and faith and knowledge that, no matter the outside pain, the deep pain inside had been healed through John Maximovitch's help and prayers to God. I felt renewed in body, soul, mind and spirit. Praised be our Lord, and thanks to Blessed John!
Postscript: After I finished writing this, I remembered something else of note: a few days before a big celebration for which I was co-ordinator (December 7), I began to feel stiff and sore again, which made me again
stand and kneel through carry heavy things. On I stood almost all day,

 292 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
fearful of the return of the constant pain. I am sure part of it was caused by the tension from planning this big event and having it "come down to the wire." When the stiffness began again, it was my feet which were af- fected first—where I had not put the oil! With the return of the stiffness and tension,
I have been struggling with the fear, the pain and the other emotions: my shame at having doubted and turned my back on the gift given to me through Blessed John Maxi- movitch, my lack of faith, unbelief and doubtful mind which caused the gift to be taken back, etc. All of this came to the fore- front again because of my writing the above account. After I wrote, I prayed again about it and after a while I realized I was walking without a limp and had no pain again! I also broke my silence of unbelief and told others about the miracle of healing which had taken place and will continue to. I thank God for the gifts He has given me.
Katherine December
Portland,
33.
Healing of Neuralgia
Kersting 29, 1985 Oregon
I was praying fervently to Archbishop John about a certain question, asking him to show me what to do and to help us. I contin- ued praying for about three minutes, and af- ter the three minutes a terribly painful neu- ralgia which was in my neck, shoulders and back disappeared! This neuralgia had come

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 293
upon me unexpectedly last Thursday, six days ago.
+Metropolitan Pangratios Greek Orthodox Diocese of Vasiloupolis May 16/29, 1986 Woodside, New York
34.
Miraculous Help After Reading
the Service to Blessed John
Previously I was shown but did not possess the latest issue of The Orthodox Word [nos. 123-124] and the St. Herman Cal- endar for 1986, both with a color icon of Blessed John. Then finally, on the eve of January 23, I received The Orthodox Word in the mail, but not the Calendar. And look what happened:
I was of course very happy to receive the issue—such a beautiful icon of Blessed John. He looks as if he were alive; his eyes look straight at you. I prayed very hard to him after reading Zinaida's account of his miracles in Paris. Since the issue contaihed a whole Service to him and the next day was Sunday, I decided to read the Service then, after church. In reading the Service that Sunday, I had to sit down because my leg, which had ached painfully for over a year, still hurt very badly. This was the eve of my namesday. On Monday, the morning of my namesday, as I was sitting in an armchair, my leg was itching terribly, almost unbeara- bly. I took off my sock and saw that my leg

 294 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
was all covered with powder, similar to dan- druff. Evidently I had rubbed so hard that it had become red. My entire stocking was full of this powder. I wondered what had hap- pened, and why. This brought to my atten- tion the fact that my leg had stopped hurt- ing. There was no pain! And now, although I still limp, it no longer hurts. Yesterday I even walked all the way to the store in town and safely returned. I did so with a cane, but without pain! This is a miracle of Blessed John and I testify to it.
Nina A. Fokine Calistoga, California February 8, 1986
35.
The Closeness of Blessed John
I want to let you know of two small but far from insignificant events which happened to me last night.
I was alone in my room, feeling quite disordered and on edge. I felt greatly frus- trated in my inability to focus on any single activity. I was particularly disturbed by the fact that I had been unable to complete any piece of writing I'd begun in over two years. Determined to change this, I sat down at my desk but still could not make a decision as to what theme I should choose. Next I felt a strong urge to pray and to ask God's help and direction. What does He want me to work on? So, I went to my icon corner and began to pray. I kept scanning the faces of the

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 295
Saints before me when suddenly the face of Blessed John seemed to glow and to come a- live. All during this time, one of the children living in the apartment above me had been yelling and crying hysterically. I could hear her father trying to calm her down but to no avail. So I prayed to Blessed John to help and comfort her, recalling his particular con- cern and love for children. About fifteen se- conds later there was total silence and calm, and not another peep all night.
Then I asked Blessed John to help me to write again (for it does so bring me peace and joy) and to help me know what I should write about.
So, just about a half hour ago, 1 re- ceived a call from someone in San Francisco asking me to write about a specific topic. It had been almost a year since I had heard from him at all.
Glory to God in His Saints!
M. Duff April 2, 1986 Indianapolis, Indiana
36.
Protection of Three Orthodox Boys
Dear Fathers, I keep
reading about Blessed Vladika John and his miracles over and over, but
until now I have failed to
three different miracles he worked for three different boys I know. It is .my hope that, when these miracles are revealed, spiritual
share with you

 296 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
children of Vladika John will hasten even faster towards his canonization.
I. Adam Russell
The first incident involved Adam Rus-
sell, my son of Irish, English, French and Russian descent, and took place on January 7th, 1970—Orthodox Christmas. I was a newly baptized Orthodox Christian, pregnant with my first child. I was twenty-three years old. Like many converts who never knew Vladika John, after reading his Life—the healings he worked while alive, the orphans he saved, the troubled people he helped, the Orthodox communities he started single-handedly among
the
nos,
love and devotion towards him. So, when I prayed to God, His Mother and the Saints for
French, Dutch, Chinese, Irish, Philippi- Japanese, etc.—I developed an immense
direction, I always my prayers.
Living across Nicholas church
included Blessed
the street from rectory in Seattle
John in
the St. where
Blessed John died, I felt honored to know a "modern saint" and privileged to participate in the panikhida for him every Thursday in the little room where he died. With reverence I kissed the chair in which he died, his kami- lavka, episcopal robes and chotki. One of his Spiritual children, George Kalfov, was usually there, singing with the old priest Father An- drew.
As a convert, I believed in the Ortho- dox Church but didn't understand the impor- tance of the Old Calendar. So, while preg- nant, Knowing my child would be born around

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 297
Christmas, I prayed to God's Mother and St. John for my child to be born on the "True
Christmas."
and January
excited but
ence the things that were ahead of me!
December 25th came and went, 7th approached. I was getting never dreamed I would experi-
I could no longer walk up the rectory stairs because it was my last month before delivery, so I prayed even more fervently to Viadika. A few days before January 7th, I awoke to a strange phenomenon. (My husband Mechisedek was sleeping beside me.) My room was completely engulfed in beautiful, unusual white light. I thought I was awake and yet I felt so strange, as if I was in Paradise. A nun in white knelt before my bed, next to the baby basinette—I couldn't see her face because she was prostrating. And then I saw him—Vladika—all in his glowing white robes, standing in my doorway. I knew it was him because I thought of him. He was short; his
face was brilliant, although he hid it by the hallway partition, and with his right hand he blessed me. This vision lasted only an in- stant. I believe that the nun in white was St. Elizabeth Feodorovna because I thought of her, too.
At 3 a.m. on January 7th, 1970, my la- bor pains started, and to my joy by 4 p.m. our son Adam was born. I glorified God, the Theotokos and of course Saints John and Eli- zabeth!
I will try to remain faithful to the Old Calendar, and to me it is no question!

 298 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
II. Timothy Lockhead, Reader Seventeen-year-old Timothy Lockhead,
whose mother is Roumanian Orthodox and whose father is a Scottish convert, suddenly developed seizures for no apparent reason in 1984. He was unconscious and seizuring in a Canadian hospital. The doctors found a mass of malignant cells, a malformation of the brain from birth. They stated that Timothy should have died years ago and there was "no cure" for his disease. His sorrowing parents James and Eva went to their priests there—Frs. Varlaam, Lazarus and Moses—asking for pray- ers. Father Lazarus had a little bottle of Blessed John oil at the monastery, and they brought it with them to the hospital and be- gan the moleben for the sick. And then—to the horror of all—the heart monitor indicated no pulse: Timothy had no heart beat! He was dying!
Quickly Father Lazarus opened the bot- tle of Blessed John oil and made the sign of the Cross on Timothy's head, begging Vladi- Ka's help with tears running down his cheeks.... And—miracle of miracles—Timo-
thy's heart began to beat, stopped and he opened his eyes!
seizures
the The doctors were astounded.
went peacefully to
morning, sat up
home. Precautionary
was kept in the hospital three rays of his brain were
cells had disappeared!
Timothy the next asked to go
were taken. He more days. X- the malignant
in
bed measures
sleep, awoke
and
taken:
The only things re-

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 299
maining were a few small calcium deposits a- bout which the doctors were not concerned.
Timothy finished a year of college this year, and continues to read in Church! Glo- ry to God! And St. John!
III. Anastassy Kortessis
Anastassy Kortessis, an eight-year-old
little Greek boy from the monastery parish of St. Tikhon, suddenly developed a faulty kid- ney. He turned yellow, and began dialysis three times a week, which is extremely pain- ful for an adult, ‘let alone a child. The doc- tors said he would soon die, as both kidneys
seemed worse.
bad and his condition
had grown
His
Greek parents were
to God, the Theotokos, and all the
prayed
Saints for help.
One night while sleeping, Mrs.
tessis had a dream. She was in a chapel she had never seen. A nun named "Mother Ioan- na" approached her and told her that, if she wanted Anastassy healed, she should get oil from the Sepulchre of Archbishop John Maxi- movitch in San Francisco. "Who are you?"
Mrs. Kortessis asked. "I am the nun answered.
Mother
Kor-
Ioanna,"”
Mrs. Kortessis bishop John?" she
band Stamatis. "I "Let's ask our priests."
awoke. asked her
"Who sleeping
Arch- hus- said.
don't Know," he =
Fr. Lazarus was not at the monastery. Fr. Varlaam told the Kortessis couple about Blessed John Maximovitch. "I wish San Fran- cisco wasn't so far—we can't go now!" cried
sorrowful
and
is

 300 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Mrs. Kortessis. Fr. Varlaam remembered he had a small bottle of Vladika's oil at the mon- astery.
They quickly went to the _ hospital,
anointed Anastassy areas—with Vladi-
The
his temperature and voiding were normal, the pain stopped and he walked! The _ doctors were astounded.
Anastassy returned to school. He only has to go to the hospital once a month for a blood transfusion, but his kidneys function normally. Glory to God and St. John!
Thus ends the stories of the miracles of these three Orthodox boys whom God has fa- vored through St. John.
Epilogue
Why do many people—including bishops,
clergy, -and laity—fail to recognize Vladika John as "Blessed," let alone as a Saint, and continue to hold back his glorification?
Are we so blind with our own cares and ambitions—this life, materialism and modern- ism—that, even though we call ourselves Or- thodox Christians, say our prayers and keep the traditions of the Holy Orthodox Church, we somehow fail to understand what Ortho- doxy really is, what our goal in this life should be, and fail to use what little time we have wisely?
Why are we jealous of those who do good, as Cain was of Abel? And why are we jealous when those who do good become popu-
served the moleben and
—especially ka's oil.
in the kidney
next day his
condition improved,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 301
lar and we do not? Don't we realize that, if we also prayed, fasted, struggled, suffered and gave up things of this life, the Lord would work in us, too, as He did in Vladika?
Is sanctity only reserved for the Apos- tles all the Saints of Russia—but not for us? Can there be no modern Saints? God _ forbid! Jesus is the same yesterday, today and for- ever (Heb. 13:8).
Yes, brothers: mere men, even in the 20th century, can become angels, can be transfigured and work miracles through pray- er and fasting (Matt. 17:21). —But what is a Saint? Does a Saint drive lavish automobiles and attend gatherings where he knows he will have a cushioned seat of honor; does he have constant popularity, money coming in, no sickness, worries or cares, constant youth and good looks? —False! Betrayal! Don't be- lieve it! A Saint usually does not realize that he is one, for he is too busy worrying about the cares of others....
Poor Vladika suffered harassments while alive and suffers harassments now that he has left us. —Or has he left us? Miracles like Adam's, Timothy's and _ Anastassy's continue every day! As time goes on, so does the list!
Vladika's glorification continues
to be postponed
because the enemy
of the
human race works
in men, is jealous,
wants
glory for himself
and continues to
infect
others with pride, self-esteem and self-glorification.
We spiritual children of Vladika John— be we people that knew him, converts or peo- ple from different lands—feel his glorification

 302 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
is coming. We know that God Himself will glo- rify our Holy Father John because man con- tinues to be blind and to seek self-gratifica- tion. We pray for the glorification of St. John soon, and for the glorification of our suffer- ing Church in Russia. We know that St. John and suffering were inseparable and that his last earthly prayers were for _ Russia.
Glory to God for all things—blessed be God in His angels and Saints!
Sinful Nun Nadezhda April 2/15, 1986 Seattle, Washington
37.
A Miraculous Telephone
Conversation*
I'm gladly sharing my personal remini-~ scences about the then still Bishop John (Ma- ximovitch), remembering the following words of St. Nestor the Chronicler and praying his prayer:
"l implore you, my beloved brethren, do not condemn me for my crudeness if, be- ing so filled with love for the Saint, I have decided to tell everything I know concerning him, for I feared that our Lord's words with regard to the wicked and slothful slave might be applied to me.... But first of all I turn to God with a prayer: 'My Lord Omnipotent, giver of grace, Father of our Lord Jesus
* From Ruskoye Vozrozhdenie, 1985, no. 1, pp. 65-80.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS
Christ, help me. Illumine my heart,
may understand Thy commandments and open my mouth for the proclaiming of Thy miracles and the glory of Thy God-pleaser.'
I am also "filled with love for the Saint," but I fear my crudeness, my incapa- bility in transmitting "the glory of this God- pleaser." AndI don't know where to begin, how to relate in coherent order the huge mul- titude of deep, grace-filled impressions of this great Righteous One, which have been cut into my heart forever.
The bishop began his archpastoral ser- vice in Shanghai in 1934—the year of my birth—in this large international trade port of China. My family owned a house just three blocks away from the great cathedral dedicat- ed to the Most Holy Mother of God's icon "Surety of Sinners"; and my parents would walk with us, their children, to this cathe- dral on Sundays and Holy Days. My brother and I stayed in Shanghai from 1939 until our departure to Tubabao in January, 1949. We attended the Catholic "College de Sainte Jeanne d'Arc," which was located right next to the cathedral. I remember faintly the sol- emn occasion of Bishop John blessing the huge golden crosses and the raising of them upon the five domes on top of the beautiful completed cathedral. Next to the cathedral there was built a rectory which was several stories high and over the center of which was a bell tower. I recall that behind this rectory
there was an empty lot for the unfinished se- cond church; and it was here that Blessed John always celebrated the rite of the Great
that I
303

 304 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Agiasmos, the blessing of water on Epiphany. During summers, when the school was closed, my brother and I would often go to play on that rather large church lot.
I was about eight or nine years old when one hot summer day, I went into the huge, always cool cathedral in order to rest from the heat. It was a weekday, about 7:00 in the evening, and outside it was still quite light. The evening service was in progress, performed by the priest on duty, and the ca- thedral was almost empty. At his place near the massive cathedral column, between the main altar and the right side-altar, before his
analogion with church service
Bishop John. Later I learned
John unfailingly attended all nine services
[including Liturgy] in the daily cycle ap- pointed by the Orthodox Church, and that he
communicated every day. After the service
came up to him to
asked me what my
to visit him "to have a talk." I shall never forget that he, before leaving the temple, made many prostrations to the ground in front of every icon in the cathedral, as if bidding farewell for a time to his close friends—the Saints. I followed him, holding his staff in my hands. My young soul at once was drawn to this extraordinary man, subcon- sciously feeling that deeply Christian love which the good bishop nurtured in people, especially the children.
For the first time in my life I entered his large study on the second floor of the rectory. The entire right side of his office,
receive a blessing. name was and invited
I He
me
books—stood that Blessed

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 305
from the ceiling down to the level of the ana- logion in the corner, was filled with a multi- tude of icons of various sizes. For some rea- son I assumed it was quite natural that when entering his office, he would at once begin to make prostrations before the icons and again pray for a long time. Finally he sat at his desk, which was literally packed with papers, and had a long talk with me. Just like he was to do later on, he talked about the Church, about the Lives of the ascetics and Saints, about Martyrs, about Church Feasts. I did not want to go home, away from this unusual man.
It was already dark by the time Bishop John blessed me and ordered me to go home. After that I began daily—morning and eve- ning—to attend the church services in the cathedral and to serve in the altar. After Liturgy on weekdays, he would consume the Holy Gifts himself, remaining in deep prayer in the altar long after the departure of the serving priest. And again, as always, he would venerate all the icons in the cathedral before leaving it for his living quarters.
While talking to me in his office, Bles- sed John would sometimes doze off for several seconds. I found out soon enough that he never would go to sleep in bed, but would only allow himself short snatches of sleep in a chair or on his knees before his beloved icons, where his secretary, a certain Mr. Kantov, would sometimes find him unawares.
I was witness to an incredible incident of his conscious sleep! One evening, during a talk with me in his study, the telephone

 306 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
rang on his table and he answered it. I don't know with whom he talked, but I shall never forget how, continuing the conversation on the telephone, he dropped the telephone re- ceiver and fell asleep. The receiver lay on his cassock—on his knees—and he, asleep, continued for the longest time to hear and talk to the person who had called him. Ac- cording to the laws of physical nature it is absolutely not possible—neither for the bish- op to hear the one who called him, nor for that man to hear what Blessed John was an- swering him. However, judging from the length and content of what the hierarch was saying, it was obvious to me that—in this mi- raculous manner—the conversation did indeed continue!
Once while I was in his office they brought him his dinner: I remember that it was a bowl of borsht and a cup of kisel [fruit pudding]. He was alone and I was in the ad- jacent room, where they also brought to me this modest meal. And through the open door I clearly saw how Blessed John poured the sweet kisel into the bowl of borsht and began to eat this untasty mixture. At that time such things seemed to me, yet a child, absolutely natural for the bishop to do.
All the children and altar boys loved the bishop, in spite of his strictness. (Once the bishop ordered the warden Michael to whip some guilty ones for their mischief.) Blessed John became my ideal and I decided to imitate him in everything. Once during Great Lent I stopped sleeping on my bed, and would lie down to sleep on the floor; I

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 307
ceased having dinners with my family as I normally would do, and would eat only bread and water, etc. My parents got upset and brought me to the good bishop. After hearing what they had to say, he ordered his warden to go to the store and bring back some bolog- na. To my tearful pleas that "after all it is Great Lent now," the wise archpastor ordered me to eat up the -bologna that was brought
and to
parents
fasting.
ko?" I asked, still wishing in some "special manner" to continue my podvig [ascetic ex- ploit]. To this he answered: “Continue at- tending church as you do, but at home do what your Father and Mother tell -you." I re- member how I became resentful that he did not designate for me some "special" ascetic podvig.
I remember still another remarkable oc- currence, or rather an incident in the life of Blessed John during which I was personally present. It was a usual weekday and the Li- turgy was being celebrated by one of the Shanghai cathedral priests. Blessed John was standing on his usual spot, and I was appar- ently serving in the altar—I don't remember for sure. But I remember well how that priest during his sermon was scolding the bishop, pointing his finger at him and resorting to such words as these: "a snake, a scorpion, a toad, a hypocrite," etc. The bishop continued to stand in his place, showing no reaction to these irrational attacks of his priest, but proceeding to read from some book before him
always remember that is more important than "How should I continue,
obedience to self-imposed then, Vladi-

 308
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
analogion. Later my Father told me and many others were indignant at
priest
asked
The
stating that it was a personal matter. What holy lack of malice! And in general no one ever heard a single word of condemnation towards anybody coming from the lips of this Righteous One.
The late archpriest Seraphim Slobodsky told me how he once asked Blessed John a question: "Who is at fault in that sad Church quarrel that is raging in connection with the cathedral building in San Francisco?" And the Blessed One very simply answered with one word: "the devil."
on his
how he
such unacceptable behavior on the part of the
towards that the
his bishop, and how they
bishop,
latter punish the however, took no
scoundrel. measures,
"Care for the human soul" is the term that could best describe that essential impulse that motivated the whole life and activity of the greatest man of prayer and Righteous One—not only of our lukewarm century, but I firmly believe, in general of the whole history of the universal Christian Church. Otherwise, how can one explain all that I was a living witness of? I saw how, for example, his face would at times literally become transfigured during Liturgies on great Feast days, shining with unearthly light; and how his eyes, al- ways full of divine love, clearly reflected un- utterable joy—unattainable for us sinners— from the presence of the Holy Spirit. I be- held how on the Paschal
as if carried by angels, around the whole of the newly built Shanghai cathedral, exclaim-
night he would fly,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 309
ing with a fulness of joy the victory~bearing words: "Christ is risen! Christ is risen!" There was no limit, it seemed, to his genuine exultation: his whole being was immersed in the joy of Christ, Whom he truly and entirely loved.
But what was most astonishing was his gift of seeing the human heart and attracting it to Christ. After all, if it were not for this Righteous One, I would have never thought of ever serving the Church in the priestly calling. And how amazing was his prediction of what was to happen to us! In his letter of October 23/November 7, 1949 to my brother and me—when we were only thirteen and fif- teen years old, had just arrived in Australia from ‘the Philippine Islands and were already rarely going to church—he forewarned us: "When we abandon God's ways, we can enjoy our bodies only for a time—then we will feel the bitterness of that evil, which appears sweet." Even today I cannot read these pro- phetic words without bitter tears of grati- tude—thirty-five years later!
He knew that I would write to him on May 19/June 1, 1969: "Oh, how I wish I
could talk to you personally,
much has happened and been impressed upon my mind since I was in the Philippines, that I do not recognize myself. The _ spiritual striving of my childhood have sunken into my sinful, materialistic surroundings."
But the great saint saw that not all of my spiritual strivings were "sunken," and he continued to call me to serve. the Church, advising me "to receive a theological educa-
Vladiko! So

 310 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
tion and for this purpose to enroll in Holy Trinity Seminary. May the Lord help you and may He bless you on that path" (letter of January 18/ 31, 1961).
Of course, I have no adequate words to express my gratitude to and love for the un- forgettable archpastor. During the earthly life of a bishop we liturgically exclaim: "Through the holy prayers of our master, O lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on us." But since "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living" (Matt. 22:32), according to the truthful words of our Saviour Himself, I even today continue to cal for the help of Saint John with that same prayer.
Constantly thanking God for vouchsaf- ing me to be a witness of His greatest saint, through whose prayers I have not sunken en- tirely into the vanity of this world, I have no doubt that the day will come when the earthly Church will also canonize Archbishop John as one of those "of whom the world was not worthy" (Heb. 11:38)—and we shall thank God, wondrous in His saints.
Fr. George Larin
38.
Removal of a Swelling
Vladika John was to us orphans like a loving father, a great friend who was very understanding. In the orphanage he would even have parties for us several times a year, for he knew that we children also had

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 311
to have some fun. He was a spiritual man, a man of holy life, and yet he also understood secular life. We could always come to him and ask his help when we were heavy-hearted, and he would always understand and lovingly console us. He would always joke with us so that we never felt sad.
He especially loved me because I was the first girl who came to live in his orphan- age. He also used to visit me. here occasional- ly, and he very much loved my children, who ealled him "Grandpa." My daughter Olga was baptized by him at St. Tikhon's orphanage house here in San Francisco. When he died I lost both a great friend and a father.
I had a husband who was both a ruffian and an atheist. He used to beat me. I com- plained to Viadika, who summoned him and asked, "Why do you beat Valya?"
To this my husband answered, "Because she works and does not give me the money." "And where does she spend the mon-
ey?" Vladika said. "She spends it on child- ren. It is very good that she spends it on children and not on loose living. If you will hurt Valya I will take her back to St. Tik- hon's orphanage. It will not be difficult for me to support her there. I brought up, with God's help, 3,500 orphans, so that will not be a problem."
My husband promised not to hurt me any more and was a good husband after that, while Vladika was alive; but when Vladika died he was bad again, and I divorced him.
The reason I describe all this to you is that a miracle occurred because of it. Evi-

 312 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
dently, when my husband hit me on the chest, a lump developed that was the size of a fist. I went to see a doctor, Mrs. Shimkin, and showed it to her. She told me that a ser- ies of injections should dissolve it. After sev- eral injections the lump hardened. Then I went to Fr. Mitrophan and told him every- thing that had happened. He told me, "Let us go to dear Blessed John's Sepulchre and serve a panikhida to "Vladichenka," as you eall him. We'll take some oil from his lamp and you anoint yourself three times, saying: 'Through the prayers of our holy Archbishop John, O. God, give health to the slave of God Valentina, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Amen!'"
I did anoint myself on four occasions just as he said, and everything went away just as he said it would. Meanwhile, Dr. Shimkin had had a concilium of doctors to de- cide what to do about me, and she called me up. I told her that I did not have that swell- ing any more, but she did not believe me and told me to come to her so she could see for herself and be convinced. And when I came to her, she examined me and was amazed that I had no swelling at all. Then she asked whether she could come with me to visit that holy man's place. I told her, "Of course—lI even have a key to his Sepulchre. We'll go and pray before him, and you'll light a candle for him." To this she said that she was Jewish. I told her that people of ail faiths and denominations go to Vladichenka.
So we went. She prayed very hard and then said to me, "I felt much better in my heart

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 313
as I placed a candle for your holy bishop." Dr. Shimkin, a good woman, died sev- eral years ago, and Father Mitrophan is para- lyzed now and cannot write. Now I don't
know what to do.
You've probably heard that three years
ago
I almost
died during an operation; and even
now I
sometimes don't feel very well. But
Blessed John saved me once more.
All who
knew me
served panikhidas for him so that he would save me. He always protects me from all sorts of troubles and accidents. I'll write to you more about this some other time.
Bless prayers.
me. I'm asking your holy
..
,
sinful Valentina Diatroptov July, 1985
39.
Intercession for a Jewish Boy
One Russian Jewish lady had a sick son, and no matter how she took care of him everything was to no avail. She was in near despair. She was told that the Russians had a "Batiushka Ioann" who served in the cathe- dral and through whose prayers many re- ceived healings. So she went to the cathedral and waited until Blessed John was through with the services and was leaving. She came up to him and asked him to pray for her son, whom she decided to call Misha [the Russian diminutive for Michael] so that Blessed John would not know that he was a Jew. Blessed John just looked at her and said, "I shall pray for Moishe" [or Moses, the boy's actual

 314 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
name]. Soon after that the boy began to get well.
Vsevolod Alexandrovich Reyer Brazil, South America (in Russian Life, September 27, 1966)
40.
A Paschal Resurrection from Near Death
A
Shanghai told the following:
nurse from the Jewish hospital in
During Pascha week, Blessed John came to the hospital in order to visit some Russian
Orthodox
through
front of
where an elderly Jewish lady was dying. Her relatives in the vestibule of the same hospital were already expecting her death. Blessed John raised the cross over her screen and loudly exclaimed, "Christ is Risen!" The sick lady came to and asked for water; and Bles- sed John, going to the nurse, said, "The sick lady wants to drink." The hospital per- sonnel were amazed at the change in this la- dy, who had just been about to die. Soon she got well and left the hospital.
Vsevolod Alexandrovich Reyer Brazil, South America
September 27, 1966
people who were there. Going one of the wards, he stopped in
a screen that concealed the bed

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 315
4l.
Salvation of Shanghai from Bombing
In Shanghai in 1945, when the war was over and the first Americans came, my son brought to our place three American pilots for a visit. We had supper and were sitting and talking. The subject of the talk was, of course, the war that had just ended. The se- nior pilot, addressing me and my husband, said, "You here in Shanghai have a great ho- ly man of prayer, thanks to whom you suf- fered no damage."
When I asked whom he was talking a- bout, he answered that they had once been issued an order to bomb Shanghai. With only several minutes remaining before the flight, the order had been cancelled. "We know that someone was praying very hard for you, for your salvation," said the pilot.
In my mind, as well as in the mind of my husband, just one name flashed—Blessed John. Only he could have begged God with his prayers for us to be spared like that. And no matter whom I talked with about this, everyone without exception named our beloved Blessed John, our highly honored pastor, as the one.
S. Fedorova Australia
May 11, 1963

 316
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
ing
42.
Guardian of Spanish Orthodox Christians
The Lord continually shows us his lov- protection through His faithful servant Blessed John, the founder of Orthodox miss-
ionary work in Spain. I will tell you of one of his miracles, worked—unquestionably by his intercession—in our own house.
One night, my wife and I were already in bed and already asleep, at about three o'clock in the morning. Suddenly, a very strange noise, coming from the kitchen, a- woke both of us. We immediately got up and saw that the freezer was burning in the rear. The flames had reached the roof of the kit- chen, which was already becoming black. Be- side the freezer was one window (no more than 15 centimeters away) fitted with acrylic lace curtains; this material is, as you can imagine, extremely combustible, but nothing burned. Afterwards, we realized that a por- trait of Blessed John, with a piece of his riassa, was hanging on the wall which sepa- rates our bedroom from the kitchen! We glor- ify the Lord Our True God, and our Blessed
Archbishop, whose protection was so drously shown to us sinners.
won-
Hevia
Jose G. Oncina Madrid,
Spain October 22/November 4, 1977

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 317
43.
Restoration of Mental Health
Forgive me for taking your time by writing these lines and for my poor language, but I wish to share with you some things toncerning my meetings with Blessed Bishop John. I was overjoyed: to hear people saying that it will not be long before we will see his incorrupt relics. May that happen, O Lord!
I first met him when the Lord made me, the sinful one, .worthy to spend the first week of Great Lent in the San Francisco Ca- thedral when Blessed John was serving. I must confess that I understood very little of all the long readings and prayers which he read himself. However, with the exception of when I had to work, I spent the whole of Great Lent without going out of the Cathe- dral. The first week flew by in an instant. I was in such an ecstatic state then. I exper- ienced the same thing when Blessed John vis- ited our Protection Church in order to con- secrate it. I never spoke to him personally, considering myself unworthy of taking his time. I shall never forget the time when I was present at his funeral.
Now I will tell you of two instances When he heard me, which occurred after his death:
1. My sister Juliana remained in the Old Country and lived alone in our little house. She was alone and sick, but never complained about her fate. Only once did she

 318 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
write asking that I pray hard for her, since she felt that her head didn't work right any more. She could not pray and felt dizzy very often. She had problems with circulation and eventually died from gangrene.
I was very upset and thought to my- self, "What can I do?" My prayers wouldn't pierce the ceiling to heaven, but I knew the power of our holy bishop's prayers. So I had a panikhida served for him and sent her his photograph with a note saying that she her- self should pray hard to him. In her very next letter she answered me: "My dear Sis- ter! I cannot thank God enough! My head is fully clear! I can pray! I feel as though someone's hand took it all away from me. Truly, wondrous is God in His_ saints!"
2. When I went into retirement, a ques- tion was placed before me: where should I go so as to save myself and not perish in our frightful times? When still a little girl I had wanted to enter a convent, but the Lord had directed me on a different path. It seemed that now the time had come, although late in life, to fulfill my old dream—but where?
And so, three nights in a row I saw the same dream. Blessed John appeared be- fore me—so clear, as if he were alive. I stood before him with trepidation, while he was clearly and distinctly pointing to our Protection Church—where I live in the rec- tory—and saying, "In it you shall be saved." All three nights I had exactly the same dream! So I dropped my dreaming of going somewhere, and I live happily here cleaning our church and unfailingly remembering our

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 319
dear Blessed Archbishop John. Glory be to God for all things! I beg you to kindly for- give me for having you take so much of your time to read all this. I ask your prayers and blessings.
With love in Christ,
sinful Alexandra Kiritis
Los Angeles, California July 14, 1982
44,
Deliverance from Death
EDITOR'S NOTE: There lived in Shanghai two sisters, Sophia and Anna Chijoff, who were absolutely devoted to Blessed John. Daugh- ters of a priest who was persecuted by the Soviets, they were compelled to flee from their village under horrendous difficulties, walking for many miles in order to cross the Chinese border. This experience made them aware of another world. They never married and dedicated their whole lives to the service of the Church, at first in Shanghai and then in America. In San Francisco they unfailingly continued to labor in the Cathedral where the Blessed One served and was later buried. Like myrrhbearing women, humbly and quietly keeping in their much-suffering hearts the wondrous miracles he worked, they followed Blessed John in absolute devotion wherever they were needed—at first to his parish, then to his orphanage and elsewhere. Upon his death they mourned him with bitter tears, being living witnesses to the mighty works of

 320
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Sophia (left) and Anna (right)
Nikolaevna
silent witness cannot be forgotten.
Upon our request these two sisters sent
us the following brief information, which re- fers to the Shanghai period of Blessed John's life, right after World War II. At this time, Soviet agents were enticing Russian emigrants in China to return to Russia. Blessed John led an energetic campaign against this and thus saved many lives. But his action proved to be threatening to his life: there were sev- eral attempts to kill him. Many of his devoted people—these Chijoff sisters, altar boys, or- phans, church-school students, and others—
kept a watch day and night. They would
Chijoff
His faithful servant.
not too many years: Anna died on April 3, 1973, and Sophia died six years later on February 14th, i979. Their
God, They
wrought through survived him by

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 321
make sure that at least two or three of them were near the persecuted UHierarch. His senior bishop, Victor, was on the side of the Soviets and eventually went to the Soviet Union, taking along many followers, who all bitterly regretted this move later, when it was too late. Blessed John was right.
Anna Chijoff, the author of the follow-
lived Blessed
in New York City to make
ing, also
sure that
of when
city (see
June, 1969, pp. 81-82).
In Shanghai there was a remarkable mi- raculous case involving a certain "Spaniard," a man from Hailai. He was hospitalized in a French hospital that had Roman Catholic Sis- ters as nurses. His condition was so hopeless that he was placed behind a screen so that no one would bother him during his last mo- ments of life. There was no hope of recov- ery: he was to die at any moment. Suddenly, a bell rang in his ward, a nurse-sister came and saw him sit up by himself and turn to her with a question: "Who was here just now? What kind of priest was he? I was dying and he prayed right next to. me and I felt my health come back to me." The Sister said that she saw nobody.
When he left the hospital, the man vis- ited all the Roman Catholic churches, hoping there to find the one who had healed him. One of the Catholic priests advised him to also try to visit our cathedral and look there, since, as he explained, there was an Ortho-
John would be taken
he was at Synod meetings in that Pravoslavny Blagovestnik, no. 6,
care

 322 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
dox bishop, an unusual man, a kind of Fool- for-Christ.
During this time, when Bishop Victor had already gone over to the Soviets but still lived in the cathedral house, we were all up- set because many Soviet agents would visit Bishop Victor. The boys from the orphanage and commercial schools made an attempt not to
thedral for
saw a man
church. He
handsome blue suit and a huge red flower in his lapel. We got all upset, thinking he was a "bolshevik."* After Vespers, when everyone went to receive a blessing at the dismissal, we saw that he was also walking up. We qui- etly drew closer to the Bishop, intending, in case of danger, to defend him by at least be- ing a crowd. But, to our amazement, we saw how this giant approached the Blessed One, got down before him on his knees, asked for his holy blessing, and then explained that he
had found the one who had healed him so miraculously in the hospital. The hierarch lit up, gently smiled at him and blessed him. We all uttered a sigh of relief! No danger threat- ened his life, but God's glory shone over him! This man thanked him, calling him a universal hierarch.
*Bolsheviks often wore something red to indi- cate who they were, and this man's flower was assumed to be such a sign.
leave our bishop [Blessed himself without surveillance.
John] alone by Thus, one evening we came to the ca-
Vespers. of huge was well
During proportions
dressed,
the service we enter the had a very

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 323
In Shanghai there was a certain Mother Marina, who used to instruct us: "He is a great holy man; he is a great man of prayer, an intercessor for us before the Lord, a mir- acle-worker, a man of clairvoyance." And she told us an incident that had happened to a certain lady who came to the cathedral, dressed simply, and weeping. This lady said that her sister in Russia had had a mental breakdown and was crazy, and that there was not any way she could help her. Everyone, of course, sent her to our holy hierarch. Blessed John, having listened to her story, did not say a word to her, but only blessed her with the sign of the Cross and left... She burst out in tears more bitter than be- fore and began to murmur to all who were there for having sent her to someone who didn't even feel sorry for her.
About a month passed. Once when Blessed John was serving in the cathedral, this woman came back again. This time she had a letter in her hands, which had in- formed her that her sister, Barbara, had re- covered. The lady had come to thank the Lord for it. The bishop was then censing the cathedral, walking with the censer around the church, and was approaching her. At this moment she mentally said to him, "See, with- out your prayers my sister got well again." As the bishop was passing by and censing in her direction, he said to her, "Well, glory be
to God! Thank God, your sister Barbara got well,"—-and he went on.

 324 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
The poor woman was terrified; her legs began to burn;* she wished she could fall through the earth out of shame. She _ had been saying "without your prayers my sister got well," when the hierarch was directing her to the mercy of God, calling her sister by name although she had. never managed to tel him her name before. She, of course, understood what a great servant of God was our hierarch, Blessed Archbishop John. Yes, our holy Hierarch John was indeed a univer- sal hierarch.
Anna Chijoff New York City, 1969
| 45, Deliverance from Fire
I. The Renewed Icon . With joy I want to share with you and tell everyone about Archbishop John. I knew
him from Shanghai, where as a young girl I attended commercial school. The bishop would often visit_our school and bless us children. My whole life has been spent as it were under his wonderworking protection; other- wise, it is impossible to explain the many cases when my life was’7 miraculously preserved from unavoidable death through his holy prayers which protected me.
In my childhood, when I was twelve or thirteen years old, I saw a dream while in
* A Russian expression for one who feels ter- ribly guilty.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 325
Shanghai. I saw someone take me by the hand, lead me and show me the Lord of Saba- oth, Who sat in Heaven together with ail the saints. When I stood at the foot of the steps, I saw God blessing all His saints and at the same time blessing me as well. I saw a won- drous light emanating from the Lord's out- stretched arms. It was so bright, like the strong rays of sunlight. These rays shone in straight lines from the hand of the Lord, from the top to the step on which I stood.
Many years
dream, and
Blessed John
when in Shanghai. The icon belonged to Bar- on and Baroness (Maria) Von Delinghausen, and is ancient. It began to miraculously re- new itself, as many icons did at that time in the Far East. It was all dark, painted on a wooden board; and it was impossible to dis- cern anything of what was depicted on it. Blessed John would drop wax on those spots which had begun to clear up. Now all the saints' faces are visible, and you can see the wax spots up to today. Around the head of the Heavenly Queen, the light [cleared up] spot on the halo moves like a flame that goes up and down. The icon depicts all the saints on the clouds: the Lord God of Sabaoth is enthroned above a series of clouds which serve as steps, and on them are depicted all the saints, just like I saw them in my dream when I was a little girl. It was Blessed John's favorite icon, before which he prayed many times, and was’ given me by _ the Baroness.
have passed since I saw now I possess an icon
this which before
loved so much to pray

 326 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Il. My Mysterious Healer
Many years passed by and scattered us
all to different countries. Bishop John found
In 1954 I caught the "Spanish grippe," which utterly wore me out. Besides, it repeat- ed itself many times. I was sick for a month and a half with a high temperature, not get- ting up from bed. Every day my temperature was over 103°, with decimals varying, and no medication helped. Every day a doctor would come from the apothecary and would give me injections of anti-grippe and penicillin, but nothing would help. the temperature stayed that high and would not drop. There was no one to look after me, since my husband worked at the electrical station and his work-
ing hours varied. Our daughter was attend- ing school and came home at around five p.m. because her school was far, and it took a long time to get home. So I was compelled to stay home alone. My husband would lock the house, and he and my daughter Tatiana would keep the key.
After several weeks in such a state, and all the time in delirium, I finally came to myself. That was about four o'clock in the afternoon. I remember this quite well be- cause, when I opened my eyes, right in front, of me was the clock on the night-stand. At
in the Philippines. Later to France, and we—that husband and _ daughter
himself
he was
is, I
Tatiana—came to Brazil where we settled in San Paulo.
in Tubabao assigned with my

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 327
that very time I saw an elder at the foot of my bed. He was dressed in vestments of a
gray-blue color: the very fabric of
his clothing remained clear in my mind, as if it
was handwoven. In his
left hand he held a tall wooden staff higher than his head, and
this staff was made
out of a branch with knots. The elder was
not of a high stature. He had not very thick
gray hair that fell on his shoulders, a rather
thin gray beard and a gray moustache. His
eyes seemed blue. Looking at him, I did
not at once recognize Blessed John, whose eyes
were not blue but brown. He stood there
nodding his head at me, and all the time he
was blessing me. Fear fell upon me. I covered
myself with the
blanket and thought:
how could he have come into the house when
it was locked with a key? Besides, usually
the floor boards would squeak here and there
when stepped on. All this I had not heard:
neither the squeaking nor someone entering
the front door. Lying there under the blanket,
I thought to myself that perhaps all this was
my imagination; but when I again lifted
the blanket, the same elder stood there as before,
nodding his head and and continuing to bless me.
I do not know what happened
next, but only that I fell into a deep sleep. When my
husband returned from
from school, they did
work and my daughter not wake me up be-
cause they saw that I was soundly sleeping.
At the same time the
doctor came for the u- sual injection. Feeling
my head, he told my husband that I had no
temperature and that there was no need for the injection. However,

 328 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
the doctor and my husband changed the sheet on which I slept, for it was all wet. It seemed as though I was lying in a puddle of water. I slept through the whole night and way into the next day, and woke up only by evening. There was no more temperature, but I was still very weak. In a week I got better and stronger. But who was that holy elder whom I knew healed me, since the doctor had told me that medicine was powerless and that my only hope was God? I wondered why I! hadn't recognized him.
I looked everywhere, in all churches, but could not find the face of that holy eld- er. Now, however, when I look more often at the facial features of Blessed John, I keep finding a great resemblance between him and that holy elder who was blessing me at the time of my illness in Brazil. And I have come to a conclusion: that the Lord is guiding all by His great deeds, through the holy pray- ers of Blessed John.
III. Healing of a Gall Bladder Disorder
In 1955 we moved from Brazil to the
United States and settled in San Francisco, California. Here the first of my gall bladder attacks occurred, and I subsequently had a total of nine such attacks. In 1961 was the worst, ninth attack. I was placed in Moffat Hospital on the lst of January, and on the 2nd I underwent surgery. As soon as. they opened me up, the gall bladder broke, and there was no hope of saving my life. But a true miracle took place through the prayers of Archbishop John. The doctor told me later

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 329
that, in 100% of the cases in the history of medicine, people in my particular condition have not survived. Even on my _ hospital bottle was written "a miracle!" The Lord re- turned life to me in order that I fulfill a mis- sion placed upon me.
My brother Nicholas, who was an altar boy with Blessed John in Shanghai, got sick at about the same time. I wrote many letters to the holy bishop in France asking his pray- ers, but never received an answer. Only af- ter Blessed John returned to San Francisco did he tell me that he had received all the letters and prayed. My dear brother died at a rather young age, and I survived.
IV. Rescue From an Airplane Fire
In 1966 we went on vacation to Lake
Tahoe for a few days with our dear
Nina Holte and her husband. Returning home, we took an airplane, while the Holte family remained for a few more days in Tahoe. They drove us to the airport and stood at the landing strip to watch our plane take off. As soon as I sat down in the airplane, I said that nothing bad would happen to us because Blessed John was with us. I always carry with me a picture of Blessed John: no matter where I travel, this photo of him is always with me.
The airplane was small, designed for only ten or twelve passengers. I sat on the right side with my husband Boris on the left, and only a narrow isle divided us. It was a wonderful sunny day, and the sun_ shone brightly through the window. I_ looked
friend

 330 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
through the window as we took off and saw the outline of pines and evergreens below us. We flew above trees which grew all‘over the mountains. But suddenly, nothing could be seen except blue sky in the windows in front of the pilot, who was wearing earphones and receiving messages. And from both left and right side-windows, we couldn't see anything
because of some
the pilot looked
tioned that to
strange pilot he was. As it turned out, this small airplane, as soon as it had left the ground, had had a fire in both engines. Be- ing inside the airplane, we did not even know that we were being exposed to grave danger. We were the only passengers:
cloudiness. Flying back all the time.
forward, I men- what a
my husband,
saying
including the were four people in all. To be honest, I did not even feel the
pilot and captain, there
danger—it was far from me. And so we flew for
a long time in a
burning
Airport
plane quickly landed
where extinguishing
over the place.
yellow lights
plane quickly
people swiftly
Stantly into a truck that came plane. The
speed, away
brought us
way 1 asked
and he answered,
baggage. We
airplane,
[near Oakland.]
On top flickered.
all the
way to There our
pulled us out,
truck rushed from the
burning
plane, and
to the Oakland
airport. On
the driver
only want
the baggage,
about your
Lakeland burning in the middle of a field,
The opened the
trucks were
of these
ready vehicles,
captain of the door, and some
throwing us in- right up to our off with incredible
about our "Lady, forget
to save your
life!"
all

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 331
Still not realizing that we had been in such danger, I asked him what had actually hap- pened. "Didn't you know that you were flying in a burning plane?" he responded. As soon as we had taken off into the air, both en- gines had burst into flames, though we had not known or felt any danger.
At the airport we sat waiting for about three hours for them to bring our suitcases, which they did after they had managed to ex- tinguish the burning airplane. The pilot who brought our baggage, while giving it to us, said, "The Lord must have loved someone a lot, because a plane aflame usually explodes in the air after a few minutes, and we flew for a long time and were able to land, extin- guish the fire and save you and us." The pilot concluded that, “of course, a miracle occurred."
I firmly believe that, in the burning airplane, it was the flaming prayers of our great man of prayer and righteous one which saved us from unavoidable disaster.
V. Protection From a Bullet
We had an incident in our restaurant right on the Western Christmas Eve, Decem- ber 24, 1967. Blessed John was already dead then. Right before that I saw a dream. I saw Blessed John come into’ our restaurant dressed all in black, looking a bit stouter than he did during his lifetime. He stopped right on the spot where the piano, with
chairs around it, was located; he talked to me about something, then took me and quick- ly placed me behind himself, as if shielding

 332 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
me with himself from something. And I woke up.
The entire next day I was very trou- bled, but could not explain to myself this tenseness. In the evening of December 24th, I went to our restaurant, but my upset state only increased. At this time a certain Russian young man came in. He had some argument with an American fellow and got very upset. Soon he ran out of the restaurant and in a short while returned with a gun in his hand. He went straight to that young American and stuck the gun right in his stomach. I got up and shielded the American. The gun was pointed right in my stomach now. At this moment someone jumped up from a table where
several young quickly moved away from my exactly the spot
men _ were the man's hand stomach. This
sitting, and with the gun happened on
John young
fired which
Then I remembered my dream
holy bishop who shielded me with
placing me behind himself and saving me from the bullet. Everywhere and always our dear Blessed John guards us, and me, a sinner, also.
VI. Extinquishing of a Fire
On the feast-day of Epiphany, Arch- bishop John blessed our restaurant two times.
Each time he came with Galina Pikoulin at a- bout three o'clock in the afternoon, blessing with holy water the whole restaurant and all
and
man
into the first car
turned out to be my husband's car...
myself walked
in the out of
the restaurant and that was parked,
where dream.
I saw Blessed The angry
of the himself,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 333
the people who were there at the time, which included my husband and grandmother, since they usually came in earlier than the rest of the employees.
The righteous slave of God, constantly serving God and people, did not forget even us sinners during his life and after his death.
In 1968 there was a fire in the grocery store on the corner of our block, right next to our restaurant. Only one wall separated us. The fire began from the back side of the grocery store. Our freezer pantry was adja- cent to the fence behind that store. We had a fire alarm system working. The wires of the fire alarm immediately burned, and thus gave a signal to the police station to which they were connected. This happened at nine thirty p.m. Our daughter Tanya had just sat down to have supper when she saw a whole mass of smoke coming out from under the wall that separated us from the produce store. The smoke was escaping with incredible speed into our restaurant. I could not understand where all that smoke was coming from, since just the day before we had made a major check of all the electrical wires for fire safe- ty. All these wires were encased in metallic tubes, so the fire could not have started from electricity.
At this moment we heard the sirens of fire engines and, looking out, we beheld a frightful sight right next to us. The entire Geary Boulevard had already been blocked a- gainst traffic. One. could see only fire trucks, an ambulance and police cars. The

 334
firemen
them
windows of the grocery store and fighting the fire. The fire was growing with incredible rapidity because a strong wind was blowing from the ocean, from the west—and our place was to the east of the grocery store. Geary Boulevard is laid out in direct line from the ocean, and strong winds always blow through it. The flame spread very rapidly on 17th Avenue. The fence connecting the store to the house behind it caught on fire. Part of that house was already burned out, and out of it an elderly lady was dragged and given oxygen by the doctors.
I was the last one to run out of the restaurant. Inside, everything remained ac- tive: all the burners were not shut off, be- cause we had no time. All the people who had gathered outside were pushed away by the police to the other side of the street, because
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
worked like clocks—one must give due praise. They were breaking the
the gas in our
and could blow
frightful sight.
Geary Boulevard
where. I turned
cathedral, turned
John—who was resting beneath it in his Sep- ulchre—-and uttered aloud: "O righteous Hier- arch! Stop the fire, stop the wind!"—And at that very minuté the wind stopped blowing, as if obedient to a command! There was no movement in the air, and people in the crowd began to talk about it aloud: "Look, look, the wind stopped and doesn't blow anymore!" I stood there petrified! I at once thanked
restaurant was not up any minute.
I stood in the
shut off It .was a middle of
because
westward to look
people were with a plea to
every- at the Blessed

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 335
Blessed John for the help he sent us! The people all around were amazed, but I could
not express what afraid that they their own way.
had taken would explain
place—I was it away in
Indeed, there
occurred a true miracle through the prayers of Blessed John. Our restaurant remained unharmed—the flame did not touch it. Nothing in our restaurant was burned: even the freezer pantry that was right next to the grocery store remained un- touched. It was as if the flame had jumped across the restaurant and begun to burn the fence and the adjacent house on 17th Avenue, which was severely damaged.
The next day, our insurance company changed all the carpets, painted and changed the velvet that we, had on the walls. We did not close the restaurant even for a day, but only put in air-cleaning machines that sucked out smoke. The smell of smoke remained in the restaurant for almost a year, because it kept coming from next door. I often recall all
that transpired, and
mentally or out loud I for his zealous prayers
thank for us.
Blessed John
God grant the
Heavenly Kingdom to thee, O righteous man of God, O great man of prayer for all of us!
Vera I. San Francisco,
May
Vertloogin California
18, 1977

 336 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Disappearance
46.
of Arthritic Pain
In 1937 I came to Shanghai from Japan for a short time. My long-time friend, Fr. Vasily Chuvashev, invited me to dinner at the bishop's house in order to introduce me to Bishop John. During the meal, _ the hierarch asked me many questions about Japan and the life of the Russian colony in the Japanese cities. The talk lasted the whole evening.
This first conversation with Bishop John was unforgettable for me, because that evening I at once felt what enormous spiritual influence he was exerting upon my _ soul. Since then, contact with Blessed John was not interrupted until the very last days of his earthly life. In Shanghai and here in San Francisco, he was always to me a spiritual director. And even now, when he is no longer with us, I and many others feel his unseen spiritual influence upon our souls and hearts...
I took part in helping Blessed John to move much of his flock to America. We were then begging to be with him, but he was sent to Europe. After his departure, as always when he would leave, I felt great heaviness in my soul. But when some conflict would arise and some decision would have to be made, I almost always would see Blessed John in a dream or receive a letter from him, and at once the heaviness would disappear.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 337
In 1963 I was sick with arthritis and remained so for a very long time. Several times I was put in a hospital, staying there for over a month at a time. I was also forced to be bedridden at home.
I was hardly able to move about. One day in June, when my family went to the Rus- sian River, I did not go with them. I was in no condition to travel and decided to stay home because all my bones ached badly. I could not eat, drink or sleep. At night the pain increased to such an extent that I called Kaiser Hospital and an ambulance came to get me. They brought me at first to the general reception area, but when my doctor came he at once transferred me to the emergency ward for the seriously ill.
Our Blessed John'was then already in San Francisco, for we were already going through those terrible days when the building
of the new cathedral was being halted. With the arrival of Archbishop John the building was resumed, and donations were flowing in literally like rivers as an answer to his call. But at that time there was the court trial, that very trial which one cannot remember without pain of heart, when our dear Blessed John, our great man of prayer, was placed gn the bench of the accused. This trial was in actuality a trial of our holy bishop. We know that, before the trial, Judge Day, who deeply respected Blessed John, offered him to stay in an adjacent room during the trial, but our blessed one turned down this offer and sat in court together with those who wished to be with him: Hierarchs Leonty,

 338 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Savva and Nektary.
In spite of this terrible, trying time for
Blessed John, he would not forget the sick. He visited me in the hospital several times, once even with the miracle-working Kursk Icon.
I was rapidly losing weight: I weighed only 94 pounds and looked like mere skin and bones. I could eat nothing, and the pain was unbearable. And then, precisely during these difficult days of my sickness, at the end of June, Blessed John came one day and said only these words: "That's all right—tomorrow you'll feel better."
The next day the pain was gone as if it had never existed, as if I had never been sick. I remember the amazement of my doc- tors. They kept me in the hospital for three more: days and then sent me home. I, of course, was terribly weak, so that a nurse had to come to my house and give me injec- tions. Soon even that was not needed, and I could walk by myself and travel to see the doctor. That was an amazing miracle. Thus the grace of God touched me through the supplications of our great man of prayer.
While lying in the hospital, I vowed to myself that, if the Lord would help me to get well, I would give all my strength to serving our Church. And I at once gave myself over to this work. That was during the time that the cathedral was being built. Blessed John had invited and designated people for the new Building Committee; and I joined it, appointed by the Archbishop. Up to this day I carefully preserve the paper of my

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 339
affirmation with Blessed John's signature. Contact with the blessed one continued all the years he was with us, and spiritually
it did not cease even after his demise.... I feel his presence and I believe that he is praying for all of us before the throne of God the Almighty.
On the eve of Blessed John's departure for Seattle, just a few days before his pass- ing away, I drove him to hospitals, as I had always done both day and night when it had been necessary for him. These two days, Sunday and Monday, were the last days I saw him alive. Afterwards he left for Seattle, and on Saturday came that frightful, bitter news of his death.
It is difficult to talk about and remem- ber those days, which were utterly painful and terrible for all of us. But I was honored to be appointed in charge of the Sepulchre of our great man of prayer, our wonderworker, of whom I am one of the living witnesses.
I often see Blessed John in my dreams. Here, just recently, I again saw _ him, blessing me with the cross. I always strictly kept the fasts established by our Church. But once by mistake I ate some meat during Lent, and the same night I saw Blessed John. He came to me and reproached me, saying that I broke the fast! I saw him so clearly and vividly, as I had during his lifetime.
The frequency of visitors
John's Sepulchre increases with
which can be surmised from the
candles which are placed to burn by his cof- fin. More and more people ask for oil from
to Blessed each year,
amount of

 340 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
the ever-burning lamp at his grave, firmly believing that this oil helps to reheve their sicknesses.
Let this letter of mine, this witness, add some extra lines to the book of Blessed John's veneration.
Viadimir M. Naumoff San Francisco, California, 1976
(from personal correspondence, and from My Memoirs, in Russian:
San Francisco, 1975
47.
Healing of a Hopelessly Sick Doctor
In
the 1940's, there was a well-known doctor, Nicholas C.,* who became gravely ill. His ail- ment was so serious that one concilium of doctors followed another. The best specialists came from afar for consultations, but there was no turn for the better in the condition of the sick man, and his wife was made to understand that she must be prepared for his end.
During one difficult night of keeping watch at the bed of her sick husband, Mrs. C. could no longer endure the frightful des- pair and hopelessness. Entrusting the watch of the sick man to a nurse on duty, she ran to the "Surety of Sinners" cathedral. Her
* Churilin
the Russian colony in Shanghai in

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 341
only thought was to see Bishop John, implore his prayers and seek his help and support.
It was dark outside. From the hospital to the cathedral, one had to walk about fif- teen long city blocks. The evening service in the cathedral had ended a long time be- fore. Mrs. C. went to the narrow alley that led past the cathedral towards the house where the ruling bishop, John, lived at that time. In the dark alley, a small hurrying fig- ure appeared coming towards her like a shad- ow. It came closer and closer, and finally she recognized it to be Bishop John. Not giv- ing her a chance to say a word, he uttered, "Yes, I know, I know. Let's go and pray."
They entered the dark cathedral. He went into the altar and prayed for a long time there. A feeling of fervent prayer also gripped Mrs. C., and she prayed with all her soul.
"And now let's go to him," said the bishop, and they walked to the _ hospital through the dark streets of the sleeping city.
At the bed of the sick man, who lay there unconscious, the bishop prayed and blessed him. Then he blessed the woman and left. As always, after an inspiring prayer so characteristic of him, the eyes of Blessed John shone with a brilliant light. Later, Mrs. C. often described to her friends how the eyes of the bishop shone like the stars.
Towards morning the doctor felt better, and in a few days he began slowly to recover until he got well. He emigrated together with the rest of the Russians from the Far East, through all the phases of the evacuation. He

 342 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
worked for two years as a physician in the refugee camp on Tubabao, then came to Am- erica and worked for several years, not in the full capacity of a doctor, but still in his profession.
Such was the power of Blessed John's faith and prayer. We who knew him in China, Europe or America can tell an endless amount of facts about cases when, due to the power of his prayer and his faith in God, people got well who had been hopelessly sick and condemned to die.
Olga Ivanovna Semeniuk San Francisco, California July, 1972
48.
Help in Asthma Attacks
My ‘dear friends!
I greet you with the Feast of Christmas
and the New Year, and I wish you_ good health and all sorts of good things. But es- pecially good health. In life this is every- thing: when there is none, life becomes hard.
I read and reread all the time the mag- azines you sent me [about Archbishop John in The Orthodox Word and Pravoslavny Blago- vestnik]. Since you work for the Archbishop John Memorial Society, it should interest you to know what I have already experienced several times. I suffer from intense attacks of asthma. Whenever they come, I turn with a prayer to Blessed John for this help before the Lord—and I forget all about the very existence of asthma for months, while

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 343
previously I suffered from it without interruption.
May God send you all the best. May He guard you and all your close ones.
With deepest respects, Olga Serikow San Paulo, Brazil December 15, 1967
49.
Salvation from Typhus
The memory of our dear Blessed John is fresh and will never be erased in our genera- tion of his contemporaries.
I remember him when he first arrived in Shanghai and was still a young bishop. At that time I was 23 years old, but in spite of my young years my lot was such that I had to drink a lot of sorrow and pour out a lot of tears. Every day I used to go with my little son to the early Liturgy, which was almost always served by Bishop John himself. As if féeling the state of my soul, he once so gen- tly and compassionately asked me, "You have
some sorrow?" Briefly I told him, and he un- derstood at once and consoled me. After that he became to me a substitute father to whom
I could always come for advice and consola- tion. From the very first day of his arrival, Blessed John was full of energetic activity, giving all his time—days and often even nights—to the sick, the unfortunate, the lit- tle orphans and to his extraordinary prayers and church services, forgetting himself, for-

 344 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
getting to eat or even simply to dress himself properly, as is customary of his rank. Never- theless, he was surrounded with many evil-
doing opponents
to his work in
accused him of
which are even now frightful to remember.
Yes, Blessed John did not watch how he dressed, did not take care of himself: he would wear sandals on his bare feet, would hastily put on his klobuk in any old way. This made him appear unfit for the image of his high rank. But those who knew him close- ly and who saw his bright, childlike smile, his kind and friendly eyes—especially when he was talking to children—those people could not help but see in him a true pastor who was giving his soul for his flock.
During the war I signed up for nurs- ing courses, and in the course of my study I was appointed to keep watch in different hos- pitals and clinics. I remember how Blessed John would make visits to all the hospitals, how he would bend down at the head of the beds of sick ones, consoling and praying with them. I know that often after his visits the sick would feel better and receive ‘a moral uplift, and their sufferings would not appear to them so terrible. There were many Russian people in Shanghai then. Many of them were also in prisons. Even there, Blessed John brought light and hope to these unfortunate ones, admonishing them, often giving them
Confession and Holy Communion, consoling the incarcerated, enkindling faith and hope in them.
who not only gave trouble
various ways, but who the most ridiculous
even things

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 345
I cannot even begin to talk about what Blessed John did for the refugees when China went over into the hands of the Communists. It is true that no one wanted to accept the homeless Russian people, who were deprived of all rights and every possession. And all
Know how
already an
to evacuate the refugees to islands, which they left when various countries gradually began to give refuge to them! I know that some people were thereby saved from the
claws of the Chinese Communists. Communists were not only dissatisfied with everything, but even dared to again defame the bishop, who bore all with his’ usual meekness.
Blessed John on his knees, being Archbishop, procured permission
The repulsive attack that
America waged against Blessed John when he was placed on the seat of the accused in an American court, the shameless accusations, threats and slanders—these evoked only a meek smile from the guileless righteous man, who was being "crucified" and morally tor-
mented by his own Russian his brother bishops, to whom done any harm, only good!
I will not even go into
the endless miracles which
during his life and now at the site of his grave. One could write a whole book about them. I myself, a sinful woman, have also been vouchsafed to receive help from him, not only in his presence but from a long dis- tance when he helped and comforted our fam-
Russians in
people, even by
he had
never
details occurred
about both
These

 346 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
ily at a time when unavoidable danger threat- ened us.
I.
To give a striking illustration let me
cite a case of his prayerful help described by my friend, Olga Ivanovna Semeniuk, who was very close to the church and church matters in Shanghai, and who is now in America, in California:
"At one time I was made very happy, because for a certain period I was entrusted by doctors to take care of Blessed John when he was sick. In those days, I had seen for the first time in my life a man who was en- tirely devoted to the Lord. He did not stop for a minute in his prayers. The doctors' or- ders were absolutely ignored by him, and no power could bar him from church services. If it chanced that the doctors put him to bed, then in a few minutes he would be already in the altar leading the Communion prayer ser- vice. Soon I myself experienced the power of his prayers and intercessions for us sinners before the Lord.
"My eldest son B. had always’ been Blessed John's altar boy in church, but sud- denly, on Saturday, November 16, 1943, he told me he could not go to the Vigil. He was already 17 years old. I asked him why. 'Ma- ma,' answered my boy, 'my head hurts and there's a terrible pain in my stomach.' I be- came alarmed and put him to bed, hoping that during the night the pain would go away. Suddenly, at 11 p.m., Blessed John came to visit us and, asking us to leave our son's

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 347
room, remained with him alone and prayed for a long, long time. When he came out, he said, 'Do not be afraid—everything will be all right.' I did not even understand that we were in grave danger. Blessed John left. In the morning my son was in delirium with a high fever, complaining of terrible pain in his whole body. In fear we called on_ several physicians and they had a conference. The doctors said that we should at once get the boy to the hospital. At this time, our bishop came again, confessed and gave Holy Commu- nion to the boy, and once more consoled us. When we brought our son to the hospital, several doctors gave him a thorough examina- tion and made the diagnosis: our son had dysentery, pneumonia of the left lung and typhus. At once they advised us to take him to another hospital, that of the "Orthodox Brotherhood," where there was a large, warm room for our sick boy. The Russian doctor at this hospital, Dr. Alexeyenko, examined my son and said to me, 'There is no hope. Your son will not live through this.'
"In total despair and grief I ran _ to Blessed John. I fell on my knees before him and, weeping, begged him, ‘Save my son! Pray for him! I believe only in your interces- sion before God!' Blessed John was in stern concentration. He consoled me somehow and then went with me to the hospital. Since that day he visited my son day and night, and all the time prayed over him. In about three days, when I came to see my son, he re- gained consciousness and said, 'Mother, what a shocking dream I saw today! I saw Blessed

 348 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
John and I saw many doctors and nurses, and I saw myself also, as if it was yesterday, dressed all in white; and then I woke up.' I thought to myself that most likely my son would die and that I should dress him all in white. The doctors were no longer making any attempt to make him well again because they considered him near death.
"The day after this dream, my son be- gan to recover. Thus, thanks to the prayers of our holy man, he got well and was even vouchsafed to see his future in the dream. Presently he quite successfully and with love works as a doctor himself and wears white. The late Dr. Alexeyenko and other witnesses confirmed that only the prayers of Blessed John had brought my son from the grave and
incurable sickness to life. Glory to God Who has given us such a man of prayer! Glory to God that we were made worthy to live and pray with such a righteous one as our late Hierarch John! May there be eternal and good memory to him."
Il.
Before me is a pack of letters of Bles-
sed John, which I meticulously treasure. They are so hard to understand: ugly little scribblings, but such dear ones and so well comprehensible to me! My fate was throwing me to differnet countries, often very far a- way, and Blessed John would lose track of me, and then suddenly I would receive a let- ter: "Recently I was in Brussels, in the ca- thedral memorial [dedicated to the New Crown Martyr Nicholas II] on your nameday and

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 349
prayed for you." He remembered all. He prayed for all.
If you take the "Beatitudes," they are all applicable to him. Only one thing remains to be added: Rejoice and be_ exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven!"
With the Saints give rest, O Lord, to the soul of Thy servant, the ever-memorable
Bishop John, and have mercy on us!
through
his holy prayers
Regina Van Setters February, 1977 Cannes, France
50.
Healing of Appendicitis
Dear Fathers,
I am writing to you at this time to re-
late the following incident which happened one week after the day of Archbishop John's repose this year.
On June 25, 1977, late in the. morning, I fell sick with an insufferable pain in my ab- domen, with the greatest pain on my lower right side.
I stayed in my bed, and the pain per- sisted. In the mid-afternoon I took Holy Wa- ter and made the sign of the Cross and drank some. Then after praying to Archbish- op John I drank from the small bottle of oil from the lamp that burns in his Sepulchre in San Francisco.
My landlady, who is a nurse at the Vet- eran's Hospital here, thought it was appendi- citis and wanted to take me to the doctor. In

 350 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
the early evening, when the pain had not diminished, she took me to the doctor. After examining me, he said I had all the symptoms of appendicitis and immediately sent me to the hospital where I was examined by a surgeon, who confirmed the doctor's findings and ad- mitted me to the hospital. The surgeon did not operate immediately because he felt it was in the early stages and he wanted to wait and see what developed. Because of this they could give me nothing for the pain, which was so great that I could not sleep. Finally I fell asleep about 3 a.m., saying the Jesus Prayer, with spontaneous’ supplications to Archbishop John interspersed.
When I awoke, about 8 a.m. on June 26th, the pain was greatly diminished and by the next morning, Sunday, June 27th, it was completely gone, and I was released from the hospital that afternoon. Many laboratory tests were run on the many blood samples and oth- er specimens taken from me. Although all the symptoms of appendicitis were present, the tests were all negative, showing nothing!
I thank God for this miraculous cure through the intercession of our Blessed Arch- bishop John. In spite of my many shortcom- ings and sins he never fails to come to my aid!
John Van Hulten October 6, 1977
Huntington, New York

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 351
51.
Help in Acquiring
Seminary Education
Last November I became concerned with a very serious misunderstanding that may have been the cause of my losing academic accreditation, which was needed to continue to serve God's people as a priest. After many long interviews and conferences with the aca- demic community and authorities, all finally turned out well.
During all this time, I had prayed to John Maximovitch and had had a panikhida offered at his tomb. Mr. Boris Troyan placed my name under the Archbishop's mitre, and I was able to enjoy a certain peace of soul al- though these were stormy times. Within the week the degrees were cleared, and I am now happy to serve God's people as a priest.
God is glorified in His Saints as we continue to experience Blessed John's pray- erful and loving presence with us.
Father Joseph September 13, 1978 New York City
52.
Healing of Emphysema
My
Verhitski, sent me from Santa Barbara a little Piece of cotton with oil from the lamp at Bles-
sister-in-law, Sophia Nikolaevna

 352 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
sed John's Sepulchre, together with a prayer addressed to Our Lord Jesus Christ "through the prayers of Blessed John of Shanghai and Archpriest Mitrophan," who was martyred by the Bolsheviks. There were instructions from Archimandrite Mitrophan [a spiritual son of both Blessed John and Archpriest Mitrophan] to, while saying this prayer, anoint the sick spots on my husband for the course of one month.
I had lost all faith because my hus- spiritual and physical condition had been getting worse. My husband is 89 years
old; he is a medical professor, and when he saw his latest X-ray, he said, "No physicians will help me—only God can. My sickness is an old-age sickness—emphysema of the lungs, which is incurable." It turned out to be can- cerous and could still be surgically removed. However, while tuberculosis is now success- fully treated, the enlargement of lung cells— emphysema—is not helped much even when treated surgically. Furthermore, such opera- tions are available only to very rich people. So we placed all our hope in the mercy of God.
Of course you can imagine how over- joyed we were to receive the holy oil. I at once began to anoint my husband's chest and back on both sides, as well as his forehead as is customarily done by clergy when they anoint, pronouncing with faith the above- mentioned prayer. And after that, exactly on the 30th day, there was a noticeable improve- ment in his breathing, the gasping for air disappeared altogether and his mind was more alert....
band's

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 353
And now my husband is absolutely healthy. One thing that still remains is a very extended sleep, but they say that "in sleep all sickness goes away." His appetite is gradually returning, and we hope that he will soon get strong.
I wrote all this to my sister-in-law in California, who gave me Father Mitrophan's address.
I am asking your holy prayers and blessing for us, slaves of God Theodore and Catherine.
With much respect, your
Catherine Nikolaevna Verhitsky
Buenos Aires, Argentina Day of the Holy Trinity—Pentecost
June 14, 1970
53.
Help in Finding Work
Deeply revering our unforgettable Arch- bishop John, I would like to share with oth- ers how I more than once experienced the power of miracles through his prayers.
I came to America with my son on Jan- uary 25th, 1952. We came from Tubabao in the Philippines, where I had gone right from the hospital to get on the ship. Having ar- rived in America, we settled at the house of our sponsor. My health was very bad. Being in such a condition, it was difficult to find any kind of work; besides, we had no means, the country was foreign and the language not our own. In despair I wrote a letter to Arch-

 354 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
bishop John, with tears begging him to, through his holy prayers, help me in my dif- ficult situation. The day after I sent off the letter, I was called and offered to work in a factory.
The work was hard, but with the grace of God and the prayers of Blessed John I managed to work there for a year and a half without any trouble. Considering our disad- vantage as immigrants, I clearly felt that thanks to Blessed John's prayers I was given a special inflow of strength, both physical and moral, which so wondrously appeared in connection with finding work and thus lead to success in getting settled in a foreign coun- try.
Nina Sigizmundovna Makavoy May, 1968 Bryte, California
54.
Healing of Fingers
The second case of Blessed John's in- tercession occurred when I received healing during his lifetime. I used to work at an e- lectronic plant. I had to polish minute parts on an electric sharpening belt, about 3,000 a day. It was a great strain on my fingers, and their joints began to "jump" out of place, which was unpleasant and painful. I consulted doctors. At first they applied heat in some special manner, but it did not help. Then they operated on both fingers, but my fin- gers continued "jumping" in their joints as

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 355
before. In two months they again tried sur- gery—and my condition remained as it was. I was in despair and knew not what to do.
At that time our dear Archbishop John was to visit Los Angeles, and I went. There were many people; everyone wanted to re- ceive his blessing. I stood to the side with
my bandaged
myself through
ment, Father
and asked, "Why don't you ask for the holy prayers of Archbishop John?" I indicated to him the crowd surrounding Blessed John. He took my hand and energetically began to move through the crowd, asking to let a sick per- son go forward. [I approached the blessed Archbishop and in brief told him about my ailment, with tears asking for his holy pray- ers.
And a miracle occurred through his prayers. After a short time I again went to Father Boris. He asked me, "How are your fingers?" Fingers? I was surprised, having completely forgotten about my fingers. My
fingers. It was hard to push such a crowd. At this mo-
Boris
Kritsky approached me
fingers were completely healthy. It obvious miracle. Great is the power unforgettable Archbishop John.
Nina Sigizmundovna
(same as above)
55. Disappearance of a Carbuncle
I experienced yet a third case through prayers of blessed John. This is what
the happened:
was an of our
Makavoy

 356 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
While swimming in the sea I caught an infection. It developed into a huge swelling on my neck, which turned out to be a very malignant carbuncle. From it, not only my neck but even my head swelled up. They in- jected penicillin, but nothing helped. It would neither develop nor _ dissolve. It seemed to me that I would not endure any longer and would die. And thus, when it got especially bad, I used my last strength to reach the
telephone and ask A.T. Simonovitch to re- member me during proskomedia during Divine Liturgy. After that I took a tablet of medi- cine and fell asleep. When I woke up, I was told the joyful news that A.T. Simonovitch had immediately sent a telegram to Blessed John in France, requesting his holy prayers for me the sick one. When I learned about that I at once lost all doubt about my recov- ery. In three days the answer came from
Blessed John: "I'm praying."
Since the carbuncle persisted and did
not break, the doctors cut it and took some to make a culture. And only after that did they find out how to treat it. Four months passed by. When I finally got well, Dr. Rybo told my husband in my presence, "I did not expect a good outcome. Your wife's life was saved by some miracle." I knew, too, that it had been the prayers of Archbishop John which had made me healthy again and had put
me back on my feet.
Always dedicated to and deeply venerat-
ing our dear Blessed John,
Nina Sigizmundovna Makavoy
(same as above)

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 357
56.
Help in Avoiding Surgery
My first meeting with His Eminence Archbishop John occurred when our church in Paris was modestly located in a garage on Ribera Street. He celebrated services there on Sundays, coming from Versailles where he resided in the Cadet Corps.
At that time I worked as a taxi driver, renting a car from a garage and paying the owner of the car a certain percentage of each day's earnings. I was regularly attending our modest church.
One Sunday our church warden offered
me to drive the
agreed, but the
church for a long time: he had to talk with one or another person to give directions or make various decisions. Finally we went. Dur- ing the entire ride, the bishop was sitting next to me and talking. We remembered our cadet corps years; he was glad to know that I ‘had also been a cadet, although in a dif- ferent corps—that of Vladimir-Kiev. The whole trip was filled with lively conversation. I still can't account for who was driving the
car or by what power it was driven.
When we finally arrived in Versailles, the bishop, having bestowed a blessing upon
me, let me go. Only then was I able to start my work. I was disturbed with the worry of whether I would be able, having lost so many precious work hours, to give the necessary
Archbishop to Versailles. I bishop was detained in

 358 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
sum of money to my boss. But my worries were in vain: my work went so successfully that in a short time I collected a greater sum of money than necessary. I was incredibly lucky. I do not doubt in the least that my exceptional success was sent to me through the prayers of the bishop for the service I had rendered him. Later on, I drove the bishop many times and never had to worry—
I was always extremely successful.
When Archbishop John founded in Pa-
ris, on Claude Lorrain Street, the wonderful church dedicated to All Saints of Russia, he also had there his modest cell and conducted services in this church every day, if he could. On Wednesdays and Fridays of Great Lent, he served the Liturgy of the Presancti- fied Gifts, during which only three of us were in the church: the bishop in the altar, where Father Mitrophan served with him, and I in the cliros. In his serving, this great man of prayer knew how to express and e- voke in others a great power of faith and dil-
igence in prayer.
When I was the secretary of the parish
council of our church, I was convinced—not only during meetings, but also during busi- ness encounters—how wisely, how simply and with Christian love the bishop knew how to solve the rather frequent complicated ques- tions. During his time our church and parish blossomed because we were protected by his
saving prayers.
I remember such a case. Among our
parishioners there was a couple’ named T.S. The husband got sick and was taken to

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 359
the hospital, where the doctors offered him’ the only treatment that would save _ him: immediate surgery. The sick man sent his wife to Blessed John to ask his advice and blessing. The wife came to the church on
Claude Lorrain Street, but
Bishop—he had gone to Brussels on business. Father Abbot Mitrophan said to her, "Blessed John calls me every day at a particular hour. Soon I will talk to him and will tell him about the sick man." So they agreed, and when Blessed John found out about the proposed operation, he thought for a while, evidently prayed, and said, "No need of surgery—he'll get well." The next morning, the sick man did not agree to be operated on and was removed from the hospital. He got well and is still alive today.
I personally had such an incident. In 1965 I signed up for the annual group pil- grimage to the Holy Land. Ten days before the proposed departure I unexpectedly be- came sick with some strange ailment, which was in such a severe form that any trip was unthinkable. I at once hastened to write to Blessed John in San Francisco and informed the pilgrimage leaders. Three days prior to the departure of the group, I received a let- ter from Blessed John. Not a word about my sickness in his letter! He blessed me to go on the pilgrimage and even entrusted to me, as a frequent pilgrim to the Holy Land, two new pilgrims. Having received this letter, I automatically "forgot" all about my _ severe sickness and pains. With the blessing of
did not see the

 360 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Archbishop John, the pilgrimage of that year turned out to be the most grace-filled.
I can also say that our godly Hierarch was performing his last service in Europe—a Divine Liturgy at the Lesna Convent—when our Lord sent me His great mercy: He allowed me to serve the bishop in the altar in a sti- charion for the first time in my life, fulfilling in this way my fervent wish. I believe this had special significance.
Our Blessed John is undoubtedly now at the throne of the Most High God and does not cease praying for us. And we here on earth must run to his intercession, asking his holy prayers. For we know that the ever- memorable Archbishop John is God's man, and his canonization by the earthly Church is merely a matter of time.
The truth of the above I can witness to with an oath.
Nikolai Ivanovich Boutchinsky Montmorency, France March 7/20, 1977
57.
Healing of Brain Disease
I.
I came to Shanghai in 1946. Being quite
young and following after fashions, I used lipstick heavily. Once I came into the cathe- dral when Bishop John was serving. At the end of the Liturgy I came up to him for a blessing, intending to kiss the Cross; but he did not give it to me to kiss. I stood aside

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 361
and waited for a while. Then again I went up: he blessed me but did not allow me to kiss the Cross. I was leaving the cathedral almost crying and said to some lady that the bishop had not allowed me to kiss the Cross. But the woman said, Look at yourself—how heavy is the lipstick on your lips!" Since then, in my whole life I have never put on lipstick when going to church, and I thank Blessed John for it.
II.
From Shanghai, I left together with the
Russian emigration to the island of Tubabao in the Philippines. All who came were placed in sectors. Together with us in our Eleventh Sector was a Russian lady by the name of O- lympiada Elnik. This is what she told me:
"T lived in Shanghai with my elderly mother in a tiny room, which we got with great difficulty. We paid a rather large sum of money for the key, as was. customary there. It was very hard to get an apartment, and without a large sum of money it was nearly impossible to get a room. The landlady of our house was a very grouchy, nervous woman, but we endured her because we had no other place to go. One day she came and very crudely declared that we must move out because she was selling the house and that by such-and-such a date our room should be
‘vacated. Our tears and pleas did not do any- thing to her. Mother and I were in despair, knowing full well that it was simply impossible to get a room anywhere. We did not know what to do. A thought came to me to go and

 362 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
ask Bishop John for prayers. I had heard that the bishop prayed in the cathedral all night long. I prepared a letter in which I described our trouble, begging his prayers.
"At 4 o'clock in the morning, when it was still quite dark, I came to the cathedral. It was open. I entered and it was very frightening. The entire empty cathedral was dark; only here and there lampadas were flickering before icons. Looking around, I saw a silhouette that was kneeling near the iconostasis on the right side. This was the bishop. Timidly I approached him = and stretched out my arm with the letter to the bishop, asking his prayers. But he pushed my hand with the letter aside, blessed me and said, 'Go with God—all will be well.' I left, and only then remembered that out of fear I had not said anything about our trou- ble. He did not take my letter—how would he know what I had asked him to pray for? I came home depressed and went to bed. Early in the morning someone was knocking on the
door. Having opened the door, we saw our landlady, who smiled politely (as we had nev- er seen her do before) and said to us, 'I decided not to _ sell the house. Remain and live here as long as you need to."
This was told to me personally, and I do not doubt its validity. Olympiada is a re- ligious and honest woman who lives now in Australia.
Il.
I believe that my daughter's life was
saved through Blessed John's
prayers. When

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 363
she was ten years old she became sick with meningitis. Blessed John twice visited her in the hospital with the wonderworking Kursk Icon of the Most Holy Mother of God. Thanks to his prayers she got well and the sickness left with no consequences. Glory to Thine all-powerful might, O Lord!
IV.
Now I must say something about myself.
All my life I have seen prophetic dreams be- fore some vitally important moments, and they have come true. I saw Blessed John, and I shall remember this as long as I live for it strengthened me in my faith.
Soon after the death of our archpastor,
I saw this dream: A huge temple was filled with people who were loudly and bitterly weeping over the death of Blessed John. I was standing in an adjacent room of rather small proportions, near a coffin, as in a se- pulchre. In that coffin I saw Blessed John. I came closer and looked at his face. With tre- pidation in my heart I saw that his eyes were open. And he, with a piercing, concentrated gaze, was looking straight into my soul as he had done during his life, and was observing me lovingly and with obvious joy. I was greatly moved in my heart. With joy and ex- citement I went to the door that led into the main church, swung it wide open and began to shout loudly to the people there: "Stop crying and lamenting! I know that our arch- pastor is alive—I saw his eyes! Don't cry—he is alive! He is happy! He is alive! He is a- live!" And so I woke up shouting that Bles- sed John was alive.

 364
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
My at the
childhood Convent
V.
friend and fellow-student
lost her
School [in husband.
Shanghai], Alla When he was in in 1945-1946, he was taken by the
Leonova,
Mukden
Soviets and sent off to a concentration camp in Siberia. Alla had to raise two children by herself. When she found herself, as many did, on the island of Tubabao in 1949 before going to Australia, she went to Blessed John requesting permission to start divorce proce- dures, since there was obviously no hope of ever seeing her husband. Blessed John said, "If you want to, go ahead, but you will still see your husband." The words of Blessed John came true. After 28 years, in 1977, her husband came to San Francisco as a result of her daughter's successful attempts.
In May of 1978, Alla got terribly sick. A dangerous virus got into her brain. They telephoned me and said that she had already been in a coma for five days. Several priests came and prayed. The morning after the tele- phone call, I went to the cathedral, had her name sent to the altar during Liturgy and then went downstairs to Blessed John's Se- pulchre. I slipped a little commemoration note for Alla's health under his mitre on his sar- cophagus. I was later informed that, during that very hour of the morning, she had o-
pened her eyes. Glory
to Thy power, O of Thy servant's prayers! At first Alla's memory was weak,
Lord!
but soon after—to the amazement of all the
Glory to the
power

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 365
doctors—she began to recover, and the sick- ness left her without any consequences! The doctors say that, with this ailment, even if people remain alive, which happens rarely, there are always bad consequences.
Often I, a sinner, sorrow and pray and ery because I am spiritually blind and stupid. I often think, O God, O God!—Such a great Saint and man of prayer, of such great spiri- tual power, walked amidst us, and we—not we, but I—valued him so little. Generally
we are
We do
same.
a sinner and unworthy one!
not too smart, not farseeing sheep. not value our pastors. Alla says the Forgive me, Blessed John, forgive me,
With love in Christ,
Vera S. Terehov July 27, 1978 San Francisco, California
58.
Recovery from Skin Burns
We knew Blessed
in Shanghai. Our son was
John very
well when serving in with the holy bishop, who had a
living
the altar
special place in his heart for him and for us. We know many undeniably miraculous events which were witnessed and testified to by word of mouth from many. But not so many were put in printed form. That's why we an- ticipate our accounts, as brief as they are, seeing the light of publication.

 366 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
When we came to America from China, we settled in Monterey. Blessed John visited us several times when his former acolyte, our son Vladimir, was attending school. We even
have
holy
phim
an altar boy for Fr. Gregory Kravchina, the pastor of that church.
I must confess that several unpleasant
a good bishop
 photo
outside
of us together the Monterey
with the St. Sera- served as
Church,
where
our son also
incidents
dampened
church.
writing to our son not to abandon church, our son felt compelled to frequent it and did this quite diligently. But I murmured. One day, upon being reminded to give rides to church, I complained, saying that under such a strain it is not worth the gasoline that it takes to get to church....
occurred in that parish, which our fervency towards attending But since Archbishop John kept on
Very soon after that
thing happened to us. On May 2nd, 1954, I
was alone at home, trying with
take stains off a rubber raincoat. I was in our small porch; all the windows were closed. Since there was a gas heater that was turned on, an explosion occurred. All was in flames and I was burning. I jumped out and im- mersed myself in a pool. Our neighbor called an ambulance. A doctor came and said that it was a miracle that my eyes had remained whole, since even the glass in the windows had burned. They immediately took me to a hospital, where I lay for several days. They brought me home on a stretcher, and a doc- tor would visit me with a nurse every day. I
a very terrible
gasoline to

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 367
lay at home for seven months. Both my arms and legs, from my heel to my knees, as well as my face and neck—were all burned. I could not sleep because everything was cov- ered with pus that was wet and would not dry. The doctor would make a daily change of the dressing and bandaging, but nothing helped.
It was only after seven months that I remembered about Blessed John and wrote him a letter, saying, "Four doctors said that I will be an invalid for the rest of my life. My only hope is in your prayers." We mailed the letter and I began to count the days until he would receive it. Five days passed by, and on the evening of that day I said to my hus- band that the bishop would receive my letter, would pray for me and I would be better. That night I slept the whole night without any trouble until 6 o'clock in the morning. I was surprised that my feet had become a bit drier and everything had begun to change for the better. When at 4 o'clock the doctor came to do the bandaging, he saw and said that it was a miracle. I quickly began to re- cover and am now perfectly well, although of course I have traces all over my body of that terrible accident. It was confirmed later with
the bishop that he and had obviously intercession, God happened.
Mr. and
had received my letter prayed. Without his holy knows what would have
Mrs. Vladimir Syrakuzov August, 1967
Pacific Grove, California

 Me>weone smote Gaste SF

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 369
OPPOSITE PAGE: Blessed John with the Syrakuzov family, who contri- buted testimonies #58-61, at a church in Monterey, California, 1959. Left to right: Mrs. Syraku- zov, her son, Mr. Syrakuzov, Bles- sed John and altar boys.
59. Removal of Eczema
There were many true wonders worked through the prayers of Blessed John, even in our family. While in Shanghai in 1935, right after our wedding my husband contracted ec- zema, and in all his body folds moisture col- lected on his skin. It was awful. We tried all possible remedies, and nothing helped.
On my husband's nameday, July 15/28, he went to church and received Holy Com- munion. I asked the clergy to serve for us a Molieben for the sick, separate from the oth- ers; but due to the fact that it was St. Vlad- imir's day and there were many who bore that Saint's name, the clergy came out after the Liturgy and served a Molieben for all. When I saw that this common Molieben was finished, and that the priest went into the al- tar and left the church, I went to the candle stand and asked for a separate Molieben; but they told me that it was too late because a

 370 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
common Molieben had been served. I was up- set that I had only two dollars left, and burst into tears. I stood at the door steps and wept copiously. Suddenly, Blessed John came to me and asked what was the matter. I told him that I believed in the prayers of a Molieben, but in a common Molieben I did not believe. Then the bishop told me to calm down. They went to fetch the priest, who was already walking down the street. The priest began to serve while the bishop himself went into the altar and began fervently to
pray to God. They were serving our Molieben for a long time. When it was _ finished, Blessed John came out of the altar bringing an icon of St. Vladimir, blessed my husband with it, and calmly sald: "Go with God and all will be well." And to our surprise, soon after that my husband's malady disappeared— and has never returned up to today!
(same source as above)
60. Immediate Termination of a Prolonged Illness
While in Shanghai, Blessed John never used the ricksha services, considering it not right to use human beings, who were created in the image of God, as animals pulling other human beings. Because of this he walked ev- erywhere, and of course frequently to all the hospitals.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 371
My friend was placed in the Jewish hos- pital, and Blessed John came to visit her. This Russian Orthodox friend of mine told all about him to the patient next to her, who was Jewish. The Jewish lady said, "What a pity—I am of a different faith, and your bishop will not pray for me." She had been bedridden there for two years. When Blessed John came to visit my friend the second time, she said to him, "What a pity—you will not pray for my friend here, because she is Jew- ish." Then the bishop said, "Before God all people are equal." He went to ask her what her name was and began to pray.
After several days this Jewish lady re- covered! She came to our cathedral to Blessed John and said to him, "You prayed for me, and I am well. I want to embrace Orthodoxy." But the bishop replied that, if it was only because she got well that she wanted to become Orthodox, then the reason was not right and he did not want to baptize her. That was in the 1930's.
(same source as above)
61.
Deliverance of the Homeless
Mrs. Granovsky, who is now living in
Miami, Florida, told us_
When she and her family arrived in
Shanghai, they were without any money and were placed to lodge in some classrooms on a temporary basis because of their poverty. This was in the School of Commerce, called
the _ following:

 372 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
"Remi." They stayed there about two months, but by the 15th of the following month they had to vacate because the school sessions were to be resumed. In distress, not knowing what to do, she went to see Bishop John. He looked at her with an intense countenance, and then said, "Do not worry. You will move out on the 15th." She wondered how this could be, since her husband was unemployed. But Bishop John said quietly, "Go with God!" And precisely on the 15th of that month, her husband unexpectedly received money from somewhere, and they could happily move out just as he had foretold to them.
There was an interesting case of how Blessed John healed a sick son of a very highly esteemed man in Manila in the Philip- pines; and another case of a paralyzed Amer- ican woman in San Francisco who sat in a wheelchair for years and then got up. Blessed John came to that poor woman with the Kursk Icon. Unfortunately, I do not know the details. It would be good to find out.
(same source as above)
62.
Saving of an Eye
We came from Iran to San Francisco in March of 1963 and had hardly settled when in May my 1734 year old son Michael had a ter- rible accident. I believe that through the prayers of Blessed John he was miraculously saved.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 373
On our arrival in San Francisco, we met another family that had also just come from Iran. Their older son, George Nazaren-
ko, was the same
boys
George
drove
day in
there
the car with Michael and George at full speed smashed head-on into the flat-bed of the al- ready overturned car. George's nose was broken and his face wounded. The right side of my son Michael's head was badly ripped apart, and his right eye was hanging out
of its socket. I was immediately called to the hospital in San Rafael and rushed there. The situation was critical: his life was at stake.
When we arrived, Blessed John was already there. I am still amazed, wondering how he could have known and, being so bu- sy, could have come so quickly there. When I came it was he who greeted me and began to console me. I was moved and began to apologize, saying that he was so busy and yet came here, having so many other duties. To this he said endearingly, "Matushka (I was not a priest's wife), your son will be all right. God will save his eye." I said that of course we appreciated this, but that he was so busy, etc.. He assured me that it was his duty to pray for the sick, and told me that he had been personally present dur- ing the whole time the doctor had been oper- ating. That good doctor saved Michael's eye, put in 36 stitches and, although the cost was
age as boys car, and with great
Michael, and both
Blessed John. the two friends excitement. One around San Rafael, was a car accident on the road, and
became altar
it
a
May, somewhere
bought around
of

 374 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
$23,000, he charged only $2,000 because we were poor immigrants. George's nose under- went plastic surgery and is all right now.
I always had great respect and venera- tion for Blessed John, and felt awe in his presence. I would always seek his blessing and try to be present whenever he served. Our life in America was blessed through his holy prayers, and my son's life and eyesight were miraculously saved. Although now, 23 years later, he often gets terrible headaches because the nerves on his forehead are all damaged, he is in fully good health, working a responsible job at an air-conditioning firm.
My two daughters, Elizabeth and as well as my mother, can bear this account.
Olga N. Sacramento,
Tatiana, witness to
63.
Finding of a Lost Friend
Dear Fathers,
Thank you so much for your recent is-
sues
Julem
their
extremely inspiring and soul edifying. They both helped to increase my devotion. I pray that many of those fortunate ones who have lived with the Archbishop will write accounts of their time with him.
on Archbishop John. Both Zinaida V. and Fr. George Larin's accounts of
experiences with the blessed one were
Viysousev California August 21, 1986

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 375
Please allow me to relate one miracle re- lated to Archbishop John that happened to my wife and I while we were traveling across
the country this
Francisco, we had
bishop John to ask his
a prosphora at that time, we were certain if we carried it with us, we were carrying Archbishop John's blessing with us as we traveled. We visited my father in Aspen, Co- lorado. One day when we went to pick up
‘some pictures we had taken, I was waiting in our car and got an impulse to move the car to another location. Just then I saw a very close friend of ours who was a member of our church in Indianapolis. We had not seen him for years. He explained that he had done so well in his schooling that he had been sent to Aspen to work for the music festival there for the summer.
We invited him to my father's home for prayers. He told us that he had some oil from Archbishop John's tomb, but had only used it the past three days, praying that he meet some people he knew. We all shared part of the prosphora and thanked God for the inter- cession of His saints. I know that it was Archbishop John that brought us together.
God bless you,
summer. visited
Before leaving San the crypt of Arch- blessing. Receiving
Jacob Myers Atlanta, Georgia
August 13, 1986

 376 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
64.
Preservation of a Child’s Leg
I feel close to Blessed John because every time I pray to him I feel an immediate warm and loving response of what I believe sincerely to be his spirit or presence from the place where Saints reside with God. The spiritual response I feel is very pure, holy and comforting as of course is the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, Whom Blessed John must be very close to.
Recently, my five year old son jumped out of the back seat of our large Chevy wa- gon, and his entire left leg was pinned side- ways under the back tire as the car rolled to a stop. He screamed, and my husband was stunned and afraid to back the car up until he could jump out and see exactly how he was trapped under the car. By the time he got to my son and I slid over to the driver's seat to back the car off of him, his leg had been completely under the weight of this 9 passenger vehicle almost a full minute.
We carried him gently in the house as he continued to scream, and somehow I was graced with a deep peace and calm as prayer- ful mothers sometimes are. I immediately felt moved to pray to Blessed John Maximovitch. I put my hands on his leg where the tire tread deeply marked his leg. We sat prayer- fully for several minutes and our son became very calm. I felt completely reassured by Blessed John that "all was well;" yet as com-

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 377
mon sense dictates, we felt something in his leg or knee could be crushed or broken and decided to take him for an X-ray right away. Confident in Blessed John's immediate healing response that is there every time I pray to him for my children, I felt we'd be lucky if for the next 6 months his leg would be simply black and bruised and rotten looking -- I prayed intensely that no permanent da- mage had been done.
Well, the doctor found no bones broken or fractured at all, saying it was a miracle. When our son went to sleep, the tire tread marks had turned purple. (This all happened around 7 - 9 p.m. in the evening). By the next morning there was nothing (not a mark or bruise) on his leg whatsoever, and I was in wonderful spirits. He limped slightly that first day, and by late evening and the se-
cond day he was
as though nothing
Blessed John had
my little boy and healed him completely with the love and gentleness of Christ. I am so grateful to Blessed John and am personally convinced he is a Saint that dwells in Heaven now regardless of formal canonization. I am only a mother with three children (and a fourth on the way). But I know that only a Saint from God Himself could bring so much love, kindness, comfort, warmth and immedi-
running and had ever
playing on it
ate healing and joy to my children's temples and spirits.
little
happened reached out and blessed
Blessed John has touched me in my heart, because no matter how great or small my need, when with a sincere heart I pray,
...

 378 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
he has always responded. A_ mother. often needs a companion who dwells in Heaven, and I am humbly thankful to God our Father in Heaven for His wonderful servant, Blessed John, whom He obviously performs many mir- acles through.
Not long ago, when the other side of the duplex we were living in became available, we were very excited to move over to the other side for many reasons: it had more room for raising children, garden space, bordered a large park, etc., etc.. Little did
we know that, since the
just shifted owners,
intended to increase
dramatically so that we couldn't afford to live there. We informed him that we'd be looking for somewhere else to live. Well, we looked and looked and could find nothing up to our standards within the range we could afford. Finally feeling desperate since we had to be out of our side within another week, I prayed to Blessed John for a home for our family where our needs could be met. But I left the particulars completely in God's hands to know our needs, through His servant and miracle-worker Blessed John. Within 10 minutes of my prayer, our landlord knocked on the door and told my husband it was worth it to him to keep us (he_ could already see from visiting with us on several occasions that we'd take good care of his newly purchased "“investment"), and he of- fered to lower the rent to what we could af- ford on the other side which we really wanted
whole building had the new . landlord the rent’ quite

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 379
to live in. Not only that, the landlord filled the place with a brand-new carpet, and he and his son painted everything so it was quite lovely to move into.
These are such physical things I'm speaking of, yet as a mother and homemaker, for our home to be a place for the One True Church to manifest, and for it to be a place of prayer and worship - our cell - set apart for our family from the influences of the fal- len world (at least to the extent that we don't allow that fallen world in), it is impor- tant to me that God would choose such an important place for us.
Thank you, Blessed John Maximovitch, for hearing my humble prayers. I trust so much this wonderful Saint! Glory be to our Loving Father.
Love to you in Christ our Lord,
Deborah Kuolt Portland, Oregon August 23, 1986
65. Mystical Contact
with the Hearts of Children by Bishop Savva of Edmonton
I. A Word to Children
Blessed John had an
relationship with children,
with them. I currently have several notes on the subject. But let us foreword them
absolutely unique a special sense

 380
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
with
the
Orphanage, and which he sent them when he
his own sermon which was written for children of his St. Tikhon of Zadonsk
was on an extensive leave of
them in Europe [by that time the orphanage had been moved to San Francisco, Califor- nia]. What warm fatherly words! What simpli- city and power is contained in this sermon, what care that appeals to a child's con- science!
Entrance of the Theotokos into the Temple November 21, 1952
Dear Children!
Already beginning from this day, in the
Church services we sing, "Christ is born, glorify Him!" This announces to us the ad- vent of Christ's Nativity, and we are thus called to prepare ourselves to meet Him.
What is meant by this preparation? It means that one should condition one's soul in such a way that it can be, as it were, a man- ger for the Christ Child. The Feast is to help us in this. At the end of the Nativity Fast, the Church especially praises the Three Youths and the Prophet Daniel, indicating them to us as models for emulation. And in what way have they become famous?
You Know, when they were growing as children and being brought up in the court of King Nebuchadnezzar, they denied them- selves all the fancy foods at the king's table and ate only vegetables, so as not to break the law of the Old Testament Church.
absense from

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 381
For such abstinence and obedience to the Church law, God rewarded them by giv- ing them wisdom with which they surpassed all their peers. Through the experience of fasting, their souls became firm, and thus they could reject the king's demands to bow down to an idol. And when, because they did not fulfill the impious decrees, the Three Youths were shoved into a burning furnace and Daniel was thrown into the lions' den, the Lord preserved them from all harm.
Hymns about this are sung every day at Mat- ins, reminding us of the heroism of those youths, and placing them as examples for us.
Children! You find yourselves now in a situation similar to that of those youths in Babylon. We are surrounded with people who do not know the Orthodox Faith and do not submit themselves to the laws of the Church. Before you is a choice—either to fill your- selves with all the foods forbidden by the Church, or, like Ananias, Azarius and Mis- ael, to freely reject what is forbidden. With whom do you want to be—with these youths, or with those against them? Do you want to imitate these saints who are the same age as you, or do you want to go the broad way, disdaining all rules?
A lot of manliness and strength of char- acter (firmness) was demanded from. the Three Youths in order for them to fulfill the Church laws and patristic traditions—after all, they were only four amidst a countless multitude of unbelievers. For this the Lord in His mercy glorified them before the whole world for all ages. The Lord will also reward

 382 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
each one of you for this, if you will follow the example of these youths.
Whenever you are tempted to please yourselves by eating that which is eaten by others who do not know the divine laws of
the Church of Christ, remember
the Three Youths. Then give an yourself—are you with them, are you ready to follow them and be under God's protection, or are you more interested in enjoying sweet things which perhaps seem harmless, but which in actuality make us breakers of that which made those youths strong, glorious and unconquerable. With whom are you, children, and whom do you want to follow?
May the Lord protect you from tempta- tions. May He strengthen you and may St. Tikhon of Zadonsk teach you to go on the right way.
May the blessing of the Lord be upon you all, my dear children.
Your loving Archbishop John
II. Healing of a Child
There are many touching stories of how
Blessed John would mysteriously know where a sick child would be, and at any time of day or night would come to console and heal. (See the amazing story of George Kalfov below.) In return, children responded to him sponta- neously. He never treated them in a conde- scending or pedantic way, but had _ direct contact with them. What is even more remark- able is that even after his death he would appear to children and develop mystical con-
Daniel and answer to

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 383
tact with them from the unseen world where he is now enjoying eternal bliss.
Here is a letter sent recently by Priest
went from
York City, and on the
about his son Constantine, It illustrates that special between Blessed John and
Peter Semovskikh
the little "Kotic."
spiritual contact
the souls of children. Here is what he writes together with his Matushka:
to A- way rela- even walking yet then—he was only one year and twenty days old. On the day of our arrival we were in our uncle's living room, which was all covered with carpets, and Kotic was
crawling all over the place. He crawled to a little table with a very sharp edge, then wavered and fell with all his weight on this edge, hurting his left eyebrow right near his very eye and cutting it to the bone. Blood rushed out in a stream. We all got frightened and immediately began to apply medicine, but it did not stop bleeding. by morning the eye- brow was greatly swollen, the wound was not healed and the eye was half closed. All this looked awful.
We decided to go to the "Joy of All Who Sorrow" Cathedral and the grave of the late Archbishop John. We had never seen him during his life, but had only heard much a- bout him from our relatives. People in Aus- tralia had asked us to serve a panikhida at his Sepulchre. Kotic received Holy Communion that day. After a moleben, which was served
In stopped
1967 we to New
Australia Francisco to visit our
merica, tives.
in San Our little
son, Kotic,
was not

 384
because
Philaret,
Blessed John which was on the sarcophagus. Kotic at once began to cry and kiss the man- tle. He cried so copiously that we could bare- ly calm him down; he did not want to leave, holding tightly to the mantle with his little hand and crying. When we came home to our uncle and began to put Kotic to sleep, as is customary for a little child after lunch, we noticed that the swelling was gone and that instead of the constantly flowing blood there was just a strip of dry blood. We examined him and found nothing wrong: the eye was clear and unhurt. Glory be to God, through the prayers of the Righteous Bishop!
Later, when we lived at the Synodal House in New York City, Kotic got sick with the "croup." Twice we called a doctor to our house. He gave us medicine and gave an in- jection, but said that the best medicine was steam baths. We lived in one room and had no bath, not even a sink. I had to be run- ning to the common bathroom across the hall. After the steam Kotic would get better and breathe freely. This croup is a throat sick-
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
it was the nameday of Metropolitan we placed Kotic on the mantle of
would larger, baths would help to soften these hardening scabs.
But about a half an hour later he would a- gain begin to suffocate. In spite of all our attempts, Kotic did not get any relief. Be- cause of weakness, on the fifth day of his sickness he could not even lift up his head any longer. At one point he fell asleep for a
ness: in the throat some tiny
scabs
and
steam
appear and causing the
would grow larger child to choke. So

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 385
while, then suddenly awakened and asked to be held up. He showed that he wanted to go to the side of the room where we had a bowl of fruit on the table. So we thought that he had an appetite, which was a good sign since for five days he had been fed only with sweet water. When we brought him to the fruit, he pointed with his finger further, to where a portrait of Archbishop John was standing. He took it, placed it on his head and began to cry bitterly. We placed him on his bed together with the portrait and he at once fell asleep. We told all this to Father Nikita, who immediately telephoned San Francisco to have a panikhida served over the coffin of Blessed John. And after that day Kotic began to get well.
Once while playing in the living room, Kotic suddenly ran into the _ kitchen all frightened. With excitement he told us in his children's talk that Blessed John had just come into the hallway, smiled at him and Knocked with his staff. We showed him a pho- tograph of the Bishop and he began to assure us that it was he.
Now we live in New Diveyevo Convent, and here again a strange incident took place. Waking up after a midday nap, Kotic told us:
"Blessed John visited me,
patted dress klobuk me."
me on the (he meant a
and staff,
head. riasson)
blessed was in
He and he
"Well, what did he tell you?" we asked him.
me and a blue and his mantle, was talking with

 386 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Kotic answered, "Blessed John said not to tell anybody anything."
No less than a half an hour later, our friend D.S. Kulikovsky came in and brought us postcards of Archbishop John, in which he was photographed in a blue riasson with a klobuk and a staff, only without a mantle. We were amazed at such a coincidence and began to ask Kotic how he had seen the Bishop. Kotic stated that that was exactly how he had seen him, only with a mantle. We told all this to D.S. Kulikovsky, who then took out a large portrait of the Bishop and asked, "Well, what did the Bishop tell you?" But Kotic was silent. Later, he did say to our friend after all, "Blessed John told me not to say any- thing to anybody." Then it became clear why he was silent: it was because he was fulfilling an obedience to the request of the Bishop.
Thus, through
parent contact, we know Blessed John
such invisible but ap- from Unfortunately, during his lifetime we were not able to meet him, but
personal experience.
we deeply revere him and consider him a saint. I personally pray to him and see that he hears and helps. Actually, a lot of won- derful things can be heard about him, both from eye-witnesses and from the words of others—there is a whole sea of stories.
Generally speaking, one must say that Blessed John is a kind of "watershed," espe- cially in our time, between people. One can observe many clear examples: those who are venerating Blessed John turn out to be people dedicated and faithful to the Church

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 387
of Christ, and those who do not venerate and even defame him, reveal themselves to be pursuing mercenary aims and filled with con- ceit. That is why it is so consoling to see that there are _ still venerators of Blessed John, and hence people of oneness of soul and mind. May God bless and help those who labor in glorifying Blessed John. There are less and less people, even among the clergy, who hold in reverence this great ascetic of our days, but that is not surprising. After all, Christ Himself said, "When the Son of
Man cometh, earth?" (Luke
shall 18:8).
He find faith on _ the
Fr. Peter Simovskikh Brisbane, Queensland Australia
66.
Healing of a Protruded Spinal Disc
I wanted to tell you about a miracle I had with the oil from Blessed John's Sepul- chre in San Francisco. Last month I got a protruded disc, from lifting something heavy. I've never had such incredible back pain. It happened in the morning, and I struggled through the day hoping it would ease up. It didn't, so that night I went to one of the leading chiropractors in the city. He _ told me what it was, and that there was a lot of inflammation, which I was to treat with ice packs. Before bed, my husband John anoint- ed my back with Blessed John's oil and I

 388 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
went to sleep. A few hours later I woke up and there was only some stiffness. The sev- ere pain had gone! When I went back to the chiropractor the following day, he was really surprised and said he didn't even have to work on the disc. It was just fine! I was so grateful to Blessed John, and to God for hearing the prayer of His Saint for me, a poor sinner.
Kathy Langston Toronto, Ontario, Canada
December 18/31, 1986
67.
Healing of a Thumb, Eye and Back
I first heard of Blessed John at least a year and a half ago through somebody in my community (I don't remember who). At that time, it was a case of little more than curiosity. Living in San Francisco not far from his place of rest, I went there to pray and experienced a great warmth of soul. I don't know how else to describe it, but there was the tangible presence of a great Saint there, that was unmistakeable. But at that time I knew so little of Blessed John—his life, his writings, his place in the Church—and I had no references, no books, nobody to ask about him, so I prayed to him to help me to know him better. A couple of days later (this was probably October, 1985), I went to the bookstore of the Holy Virgin Cathedral to see again if I could find something about Blessed John, and I was milling around when I found

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 389
myself drawn to a large photograph of Metropolitan Philaret in a bookrack. I picked it up to more closely examine it, and right behind it, completely hidden by it, was a xeroxed copy of Blessed John by Bishop Sav- va, held together by a paper clip! I was told that the book itself had been out of print for some time, so I don't know how I would have found anything like it otherwise. Incidentally,
I was overjoyed
book is going
English-speaking
to read about such a miracle-worker and lover of God and humanity.
when I heard to be reissued
that this soon. The really needs
world
healing which I_ received John happened in December,
1985.
on a Yule Mart to raise money for our children's school. Individuals with various skills come together to make handcrafted items to sell. I was working on stringed musical instruments, using a drill press. This was the Saturday before the Yule Mart, and things were not nearly finished, so I was feeling rushed and my concentration was off. At one point the wood I was working on got jammed and twisted suddenly, pulling my left thumb into the bit of the drill press. It got caught in the blades, and the skin over the knuckle got shredded. After bandaging the finger, I found that the tip of it was numb and, of course, I was unable to bend it at all. People with medical experience told me it would take weeks to heal—yet there was still much to do in the next week. Then I remembered that one of my roommates had visited Blessed John
The through
first Blessed
Every
year, our community puts
Orthodox

 390 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
and had gotten a bottle of oil from the lamp in the Sepulchre the day before my accident. So when I changed the dressing, I put a couple of drops of oil on my thumb and prayed that I would be healed at least enough to be able to continue my work. I did this for three days, and on the third day the feeling had returned and I could bend the thumb enough to go back to work. A few days later, it was almost completely healed, and those who saw it said that it had healed much faster than they ever would have expected.
The second healing took place a month or so later. One of my eyes was beginning to hurt one day, and upon looking in_ the mirror I discovered a sore on the bottom of the upper eyelid. I didn't know how it got there, but it was’ getting worse rapidly. By the middle of the day it was very painful to blink, and at that time I remembered Blessed John and I put a drop of his oil on the sore. Soon I became very sleepy and so I took a nap for an hour or two. When I awoke, the pain was completely = gone; and when I looked in the mirror, I could see no trace of the sore, either. This pain has never recurred, and I never found out what it was.
The third healing took place just prior to Pascha, 1986. For the last five years I have been employed as a carpenter; and _ several
times severe
during those muscle strains
five in
years I have had my lower back. I
tried they
chiropractors sometimes helped,
acupuncturists
but the symptoms
and
would always, eventually, return. Last Holy
and

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 391
Week was one of those times. One of the things that aggravates the pain is standing for long periods of time. During Holy Week, of course, there is much prayer, most of it done while standing. By Holy Saturday, the pain was so bad that I was forced, first to
kneel, and
the chapel
my chest.
holiest day
was sure
for services and not even sure I would be able to attend at all. Therefore, before going to sleep that night, I prayed to _ Blessed John for help, took a drop of oil and made the sign of the cross on my forehead. The next morning, it was halfway through the services that I realized, with great amazement, that I had been standing all morning and had felt no pain! And I have had no trouble with my
lower back since then, either.
And so it is with great thanksgiving to
God, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the Most Holy MTheotokos, and _ tthe tireless servant of God and man_ Blessed John Maximovitch that I add my testimony to those of countless others who have experienced the miraculous intervention of a true Saint of these times. May his Glorification by the Church come quickly!
Zachariah Liebmann November 6, 1986
San Francisco, California
finally to sit on with my knees
the floor pulled
of the up _ to of the
So here it was, of the Christian I would be
the eve calendar, and
I
unable to_ stand

 392 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
68.
Healing of Peritonitis
In Shanghai, there was a boy about 9 years old. He was severely sick. His parents thought that he had a stomach problem. The pain was terrible day after day. For three days the boy could not lift his right leg. He was lying down on the third day when Bishop John's acolyte came to them, knocked on the door of the family and said, "Vladika told me to tell your son to go to the hospital right away." So the parents started to get him up. The boy could not lift his leg because the pain was so terrible. They took him to the hospital; it was at noon. And when the doc- tors looked at him they said, "This boy is going to die because he has peritonitis. We might not save him—it is too late." So they took the boy right away to surgery, operated on him and gave him three days to see whe-
ther he would survive or not. survive this crisis—he would live.
If
he would
7th, as I
This remember. time that
was Saturday, Late in the
October evening,
about the service finished, the boy woke up and there was the bishop stand-
ing there, and he said, "George!"
The boy looked up. He did not have
to go too far to get his life back. That boy was me.
George Kalfov February, 1982
the vespers

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 393
69.
Healing of Intestinal Maladies
On October 22nd my colon ruptured dur- ing the night. It felt as though my insides dropped down to my groin. As I got sicker and sicker that night I was scarcely able to sleep. Finally the next morning I went to the doctor and we decided that I should try to take an injection for pain in the hopes
that pass.
it was merely diverticulitis and would
After four hours of this it became ap- parent that I was getting worse. By now my fever was 105 degrees.
Finally, an ambulance came and_ took me to the hospital in San Antonio. There, there was a very big commotion in the emer- gency room because our doctor here in Blanco had referred me to a particular hospital since he wanted me to see a particular surgeon. The hospital was part of the Humana Hospital chain. It definitely is not a charity hospital. Unfortunately, the Monastery has no hospital insurance. This caused the admis- sions people to be very reluctant to even allow me to have the emergency tests done that the doctors requested. I spent the time praying. After several hours, and the arrival of a relative with cash, finally the emergency tests were done.
The surgeon came in to see me and told me that my colon had ruptured. He explained

 394 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
that it had been seventeen or eighteen hours since this occurred and that I was very, very badly infected with peritonitis. I asked what my chances were. He said that he felt the odds of my living through the surgery were a good ninety percent. But he could not give me anywhere near this kind of hope for my living through the peritonitis.
I realized that I was probably going to die. Immediately, all my sins came before me. I had a profound sense that I wished I had more time to repent. I began to pray even more fervently. In a few moments I realized that I would have to rely on the mercy of an abundantly merciful God. I asked Father Pangratios, who was there with me, to call on the closest Orthodox priest and to ask him to bring me Holy Communion and to come and hear my confession. I asked the doctor to wait thirty minutes in order that this might be done.
After Father Pangratios came back to me after making the phone call, I gave him a number of instructions regarding the future of the Monastery. I told him to bring Archi- mandrite Vasili home at once, and gave mes- sages for Father Vasili to him. After a short while of this I felt as though affairs were as much in order as they could be, and at this moment the Priest arrived. He heard my confession and gave me Communion and they rolled me into the operating room. There the anesthesiologist noticed my prayer rope and asked me if I was praying for my life. I told him that, no, I was praying for him and the

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 395
surgeon that God would guide them. He seem- ed a little shocked.
The next thing I remember is laying in intensive care and, looking up, seeing Vladi- ka John Maximovitch (a recently declared saint, whose Glorification I participated in).
He approached towards me and told me, "It is not yet your time." Others also saw his presence. At this moment I realized that I was still alive (for at first I thought that I was approaching the Heavenly Realm). Many people had been praying to Vladika John throughout the surgery for my healing.
The next day, everyone was prepared to begin the long battle with peritonitis. My fever, however, suddenly disappeared. Vlad- ika John, no doubt.
I lay there with a tube up my nose and down into my stomach pumping bile from my
stomach for
even a drink of water during this time. Now everyone was concerned because my colostomy had not yet begun to work. Finally it began to work. The tubes came out, thank God. After three or four more days I was dis- charged. Coming home, I have had plenty of time to pray, as I did laying there in the hospital, fasting those twelve days.
Having come close to my death—I pre- pared myself to die. Now it is as though ev- ery moment is a gift from God. I know that this gift is not for myself but for the Church. Pray that I may use the gift wisely and that I may be responsive to those things
twelve days. I was not allowed

 396 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
that Christ calls me to for the good of the Holy Church.
Bishop Benedict New Sarov Monastery Blanco, Texas
November, 1986
70.
Relief from a Rash
in
grace to our church. Just before they came, I had developed a rash on my arms and legs. It was slight at first and not very annoying, but it would spread stubbornly. As soon as
one spot
spring up.
but said
medicine to rub on it. I went through three tubes of medicine and three months of con- cern that this rash would not leave. Finally, I asked our pastor for a healing blessing.
He first gave me a bottle of oil blessed by the Blessed John Maximovitch, and in- structed me to anoint myself and apply it to the rash. I was familiar with the saving grace that comes from this oil, because many people have used it in our community before, and every time someone has used it, there has been great blessing given. I was ashamed that I had not thought of asking for it be- fore.
St. Louis were delighted to re- pastors—having been over a year without any—and they have brought such
ceive
We our
it
would clear My doctor was only
up, another would could not identify it, external and gave me

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 397
I took it home, and after three days my rash was gone. There were faint spots where it had been, but no bumps as before. Praise to God! I thought afterwards that it was good that I had not thought of asking for it before, or I would probably have as- sumed it would have healed of its own ac- cord. Now I know that the prayers of Blessed John interceded for me to help my stubborn sin be cleansed. Thank God for the grace of His Saints!
Martha Mills St. Louis, Missouri December 18, 1986
71.
Healing from Neuralgia and the AIDS Virus
I would like to write about two miracles that occurred in my family this year. They
came about with Vladika John.
Our twenty
began having severe
February. They were
migraine, then stress
neuralgia. The pain continued through March, April and May. Great Lent came and so did Pascha. She is a very devout person and did everything possible to get better—a molieben to the Icon of Our Lady of Kursk was said; she went to Confession and took Communion several times. She used the cotton from the
the prayers
and help from
year old
daughter, Lara, headaches last first diagnosed as and _ eventually as

 398 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
myrrh-giving icon from Montreal to anoint that part of her head that was in pain. After seeing many doctors and finally leaving her studies at college and taking an incomplete, she went with us to a new _ doctor—the
seventh. He diagnosed
severe _ occipital that the _ occipital
neuralgia—which nerve had cracked like a live electric
medication, because
getting suggested
the medications, her mind was
which were all
being One
means and
the nerve wire. The
was open only cure, That was the pain was. constant.
was calmness.
besides
impossible
With all
narcotic,
she was
friends
John and pouring out our hearts to him in a letter and sending it to Father Ilya in San Francisco. We wrote the letter immediately and mailed it that afternoon from the post office. Upon receiving the letter, Father Ilya said a panikhida for Vladika, and put the letter under his mitre [which is kept in his Sepulchre]. The day of the panikhida, our daughter felt that a burden had been lifted from her, and she began to tell us how she had been feeling all these months. Several days later we received a letter from Father Ilya. I called him immediately to tell him that something was happening to Lara. He men- tioned that he had served a molieben for her that morning. That morning Lara had stopped taking all medications. She told this to us much later.
worse. writing
affected and of our dear to Vladika
We had been told that a _ psychiatrist should talk to Lara and we had made an ap- pointment for the next day. He confirmed

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 399
Lara's illness, but, as a person, she was quite normal and there was no need to see him unless she herself wanted to do so. The
next day I
work. Lara
the morning.
woke up and
but floating above. It was a weird feeling because she knew that something had happen- ed. She got out of bed and still felt as if her feet were not on the ground. Then she realized that there was no pain. She felt light-headed, full of energy and joy. She had not understood what we had done, and when we explained that Vladika had helped her, she did not understand and looked at us in amazement. She continued to gain strength and became her old self. We called Mrs.
Troyan in San Francisco to tell her the good news, had a molieben said and Lara went to Confession and Communion. Then we received a bottle of holy oil and a photograph of Vlad- ika. Lara said that Vladika looked familiar, but she had never seed him because he died just before she was born. Months passed, and Lara, looking at the photograph one day, remembered where’ she _ had seen him.
Several months before she had become ill, she had had a very bad dream. She came down the stairs in our home and saw that in our living room the icons were hanging upside down, and a figure in black holding a black cat was standing. She knew it was the devil and tried to run away but could not. Out of nowhere a small figure in black grabbed her hand and ran outside with her.
left Lara sleeping and went to
called me about She related the
ten o' clock in following: She felt that she was not in bed

 400 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
She saw the face but did not know who it was until recently when she remembered the dream. It was Vladika who saved her months before she became ill.
The second miracle involves a relative very close to us. She wanted to join the Coast Guard but was having a very hard time passing the various tests. The last test was a blood test for the virus AIDS, which is a required test. It came out positive. She was told all the negative aspects of that dis- ease and was told that they, of course, could not take her. A second test was ordered that day with the results coming in two days. I called Mrs. Troyan and explained that a pan- ikhida should be said for Vladika the next day as well as a molieben. Father Ilya did so the next morning. When the results came in the next day they were negative. The Coast Guard did not believe this and another test was ordered. It took several days for those results, but they also came out negative. She was asked to join.
Viladika again helped a_ suffering per- son—so that she would have another chance at life.
I have always looked up to Vladika for help in everything—small things—and he has helped me out. These were two very big fav- ors, and he did not forget me. The only way I can repay him is to spread the word about him to others who also seek his prayers and love. Thank you, Vladika, for hearing my humble prayers.
Irene Dutikow Flushing, New York
December 29, 1986

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 401
72.
Relief from Insomnia
I want to relate to you an experience L had with Blessed John Maximovitch. It hap- pened in this way:
It was late in the night in August, and I had been having a terrible time with hay fever. It would keep me up at night and I could not sleep. This had been going on for 2-3 weeks, and I was about at my wit's end.
I was totally exhausted, on the brink of des- pondency. It was about 3 a.m., and I had not yet been to sleep. My nose would con- stantly run, and my head and sinus were all stuffed up. So I arose from my bed and went to my dresser where there was an icon of Blessed John. As I looked at it, it was radiant and shining. I prayed to Blessed John: "Please let me sleep, please help me to sleep. I need some rest so badly." Then I went back to my bed. Right away I fell asleep and had a dream of the Blessed One. In my dream I was riding in a car, looking all over the city (it seemed to me it was San Francisco, but I do not know for sure) for the place in which Blessed John was serving the Liturgy. I found it—he was serving out- side in a big place, and I had to walk down a long avenue to get to where he was. I walked up to where he was sitting, and he came and laid his hands on my head. I felt the most wonderful blessing flow from his hands into my being. It was very powerful.

 402 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
This sweet peace flowed into my soul and filled me with its sweetness.
When I awoke, the blessing I received from Blessed John stayed with me, and I still feel that extraordinary sweetness and _ the power of that blessing...
I will tell you another story about our Saint. The father of our pastor, Rev. J., has cancer, and the doctors have given him from six months to two years to live. Once a week a few of us get together and do the canon to Blessed John and dedicate it to Rev. J.'s father. One night—right after we finish-
ed the
was in
feeling
accepting
this point she had been pretty hysterical. Then the next day she called to say he had amazingly recovered, was no longer in criti- cal condition and was doing much better. And he has been feeling pretty good. He still has cancer and is going to chemotherapy treat- ments, but is doing well. Rev. J. just went to visit him. I had given Rev. J. an icon of Archbishop John, which he took with him and gave to his father along with a bottle
of oil from the Sepulchre. He told his mother and father all about Archbishop John, and they believe him and are going to pray to Archbishop John and use the oil because they have felt the effects of his intercession for them.
So our Saint is busy at work. And I have to say that when I sing the canon to Archbishop John for Rev. J.'s father, I al-
canon—his mother called to say he
critical condition, extraordinarily
but that she calm, peaceful
was
and up to
of the whole
thing—though

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 403
ways feel the most wonderful blessings from him. He is truly close to us and loves us. I love to do the canon to him.
While I am relating these stories, I may as well tell this one: even though it is little, it is very important to me. Just before Christmas I wanted to have Confession, and previously I had been having a hard time confessing because of my hard-heartedness. I just didn't feel contrition for my sins, and this was excruciating to me because I felt so burdened. So I sang the canon to Blessed John with the prayer that he would please intercede for me and make my heart soft so that 1 could confess my sins. I sang the can- on with this prayer in my heart, and then I had Confession. The tears flowed and my heart was softened—the Lord was merciful to me through the intercession of our Blessed
Saint.
Glory be to God in His. Elaine
Saints! Herndon Indiana
Indianapolis,
Sept. 19 and Dec. 30, 1986
73.
The Miracle of the Button
Forgive me for such a long silence. I was very seriously sick. My heart for about 3 years was in a very lamentable condition. Several times I lost consciousness, so finally I was compelled to call an ambulance and to hurry with surgery. My heart was in such a bad state that I could have died any min- ute. Then one day the following happened.

 404 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Our church's feast day, Ascension, ar- rived and I wanted to go to church. Having got there, I hurried to get to the balcony where the choir is located, so as not to fall on the stairs. As I sat down on a bench, I passed out and landed on the floor. They attempted to revive me but could do nothing. A gentleman from San Francisco was present in the choir loft, and he was also attempting to bring me back to consciousness. Suddenly he glanced at a button of Blessed John pinned to my chest. He unpinned it and, cal- ling on the help of Blessed John, blessed me thrice with that pin. I at once "resurrec- ted," sat up right there on the floor and
was surprised to find myself sitting on the floor and being asked what had happened. Afterwards I felt fine, went into the back yard garden and even stayed for the common meal after the service.
But the amazing part was that when in the morning I was getting ready to go to church, I forgot to pin that Blessed John button on myself. So I had to return for the button and pin it on myself.
Isn't that a miracle? More than once the holy Hierarch John saved me from unavoidable death. Much of that has been written [see pp. 353-6 in this book], but still much is left to be written, and now it is not possible. I do not forget you in my prayers; in the morning and evening I pray for delivery from persecution so that you can continue to preach our True Orthodox Faith and glorify
our ever-memorable Archbishop
John. I ask

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 405
your blessing and holy prayers. Forgive me for the long letter.
Nina Sigizmundovna Makovoy Sacramento, California December 17, 1986
74,
Intercession for a Newborn Infant
On April 28, 1980, after a_ troubled pregnancy and several spontaneous miscarri- ages, my wife delivered our first child, a 30-week premature baby, weighing only 3 pounds and a few ounces. The baby was put in the Intensive Care Unit and looked to im- prove when suddenly a heart murmur started. I knew that this could mean surgery, a task extremely difficult considering the small size of the baby. We prayed to the Holy Mother of God and various saints to help us. I also asked God through the intercession of Arch- bishop John Maximovitch, and I promised also to write to you about this. Four days later, on a Sunday, during the Divine Liturgy the murmur suddenly stopped. I found out about this after the Liturgy, when I went to the hospital. The doctors were also amazed at the improvement. The baby did well since then, was dismissed when weighing 5 pounds
and has been baptized and chrismated in the Church of St. Barbara, in Durham. Glory be to the Holy Trinity, to the Mother of God, to the Saints and to the blessed memory of Archbishop John.

 406
In
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
the love of our Lord Jesus
Gregorios Palamas Durham, North
Christ,
Cognetti Carolina Theophany of Our Lord, 1981
75.
Raising of a Paralytic
Yesterday after Vespers, my friend Olga A. C. told me of a miracle that took place in a hospital here in New York City. On Sat- urday a priest well known to her, who served
in
was
in
the
in the church where the priest served. The priest was actually summoning Olga to a pod-
another great
jurisdiction and with
whom she told her
friends, called her that there was a hospital. This man was a
and man choir
distress
dying in director
vig (heroic, ascetic deed),
the hospital was dying from
undergone surgery, but it was already too late: he was to die that night, which was Saturday night, the eve of Christ's resurrec-
tion as celebrated every Sunday. The
in the hospital
Orthodox where
Church the man run-down
lay
neighborhood, and it was
there at night. Olga, of course, did not want to go there, but the priest insisted, stating that no one wanted to go there and help the
was far away, in a
very
dangerous to go
man's wife, frightened husband.
who was to remain
very tired alone with
and was her dying
Finally
for the recently deceased
Olga, who
had great reverence Archbishop John,
for the man in cancer. He had

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS
407
agreed to go. She turned to the
holy prelate Archbishop John,
would help her in everything and that she would not be afraid to walk those slummy streets at night, by doing which she could lighten the suffering of the wife of the dying man. Fortified by the prayers of Archbishop John, she took along some holy water. Inci- dentally she remembered some holy cotton that had been blessed on the relics of Great Martyr Barbara and that her mother had brought from Russia. She took a little piece of it and went to the hospital. Having arrived safely, she was met by a nurse (a Roman Catholic nun) who would not allow visitors to come to the sick during the night. In dis- tress, Olga stood there and thought: "What shall I do? Oh, Blessed John, help me!" And suddenly the sister told her, "All right, I will lead you to the sick man." That alone was already a miracle.
The petrified wife was at the deathbed of her dying husband. She took the cotton from Olga, dipped it in the holy water and anointed with it the forehead, eyes, cheeks and lips of the sick one. The man was para- lyzed, and one arm hung there like a rag. After some time, the wife again decided to do as she had done before, and as soon as she began to moisten the lips of the sick man with the paralyzed arm, he firmly grasped her arm and regained consciousness.
In the morning, the doctor was simply stunned at the change in the state of the sick man. And yesterday Olga again went to visit the man's wife. She arrived and saw
so
great and that he

 408 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
the man sitting relaxed on the pillows and eating something. His wife told her that all the doctors in the hospital were constantly visiting and were amazed at what had taken place: all confirmed that this was of course a miracle.
All the time, Olga had been mentally praying to our great Sufferer, Blessed Hier- arch John, that he would help. She is under a deep impression of what took place, and she believes that everything that occurred was the invisible work of the holy hierarch, an answer to her pleas. After all, everybody who knew the sick man was convinced that he would die that night.
Knowing Olga A. C. very well, I can testify that this is another case of Blessed John's miraculous intercession.
Anna Chijoff* New York City Friday, December 16/29, 1967
76.
The Clairvoyance of Blessed John
I. My friend Mrs. Popova, who lived for years in Shanghai when it was occupied by the Japanese, told me of the case of Mrs. Vandenburg, who now lives in Berkeley and with whom I've had contact. Mrs. Vandenburg
* See also testimony no. 44, pp. 319-24.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 409
was the wife of a well-to-do man from Hol- land. The Japanese arrested him and sent him to a concentration camp, and at the same time her son George caught some terrible dis- ease and was seriously il. She wrote a letter tg Bishop John, and the very next day her son was absolutely well. The Vandenburgs became very dedicated to the hierarch, and thenceforth were great benefactors to him in his philanthropic activity.
II. There was another lady in Shanghai by the name of Elizabeth Ivanovna De Blaise. She was a very beautiful lady who liked to dress fashionably and to have a good time. Her husband, Michael Arturovich De Blaise, was a captain in a merchant fleet, and was from the noble family of the De Blaise counts. Before the Russian Revolution, he was a lieutenant in the Russian fleet. His predecessor escaped from France to Russia during the French Revolution.
The following took place in Shanghai. One night, Elizabeth Ivanovna saw in a dream
Hierarch
In this
church.
go and take a look at the hierarch whom she had seen in the dream. It was the same man. When she, at the end of Liturgy, ap- proached to kiss the Cross which he held in his hand as _ is' customary, to her
John, whom she _ hardly’ knew. dream he was summoning her to So in the morning she decided to
amazement he raised the Cross high
her head and would not allow her to kiss it. Here she found out that he did this because she had lipstick on. She was terribly angry,
above

 410 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
and reached a_ state of indignation. She stepped away with hatred and decided that she must come to him and demand an apology for insulting her. However, when he met her he said calmly, "I'm so glad that you came to me. I need you badly to work in my orphan- age." She was stunned and realized that that was the reason why he had summoned her in such a mysterious way.
She worked for him with great zeal to the very end of the Shanghai emigra- tion, and was one of the most dedicated per- sons he had. Between them, however, there were differences. Once he handed her a let- ter to be passed on to someone else. Since it contained a reprimand, she was embarrass- ed and did not give it to the addressee, but instead carried that letter in her purse for a very long time. One day, Blessed John ask- ed her, "Did you give the letter?" "Yes," she answered. "What a pity," he said. "I regret what I wrote there." Then she said, "Ah, here it is. I did not give it."
I knew this Elizabeth Ivanovna
and heard this from her own lips. She
a very good woman, in fact of remarkable kindness. Now of course she is dead. Her family lived before us in that ground-floor apartment on Divisadero Street. That apart- ment was very damp, and she suffered from arthritis, from which she died.
III. The miraculous healing of Dr. Vlad- imir Semeniuk in his childhood took place in the following way. As little boys, Vladimir and his brothers were always accompanying
well, was

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 411
Blessed John, even at night when he would visit the sick. When the youngest brother, Boris, would get exhausted, the oldest, Vlad- imir, would carry him on his back. They were altar boys in the church. Once when Vladimir got seriously sick, the bishop came and said that they should not become despondent; then, however, no one thought it was so serious. It turned out to be pneumonia and_ still other dangerous sicknesses. He was taken to the _ hospital, where they considered his case hopeless. But the bishop kept visiting him and praying for him, and he got well in spite of the fatal danger.
It is not true that Bishop John did not eat anything during Great Lent. Vladimir's wife, Olga Semeniuk, testifies to the follow- ing:
While in Shanghai, Blessed John was poisoned several times through food. It was so dangerous that the doctors gave him only two months of life, and recommended that he drop everything and go to a Chinese san- itarium. He, however, would not agree and requested that Mrs. Olga Ivanovna Semeniuk prepare his food for him. The doctors told her that she should agree to this, since he would not live for a long time, anyway. But he began to get better.
She fed him the following way. During Cheesefare Week, she would make for him cheese dumplings, varenniki with sour cream, and similar dishes. Then, during the first week of Great Lent, he did not eat anything

 412 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
nor drink coffee or tea. On Saturday he would eat soup made from vegetables, but without oil. As for the other days of the
week, he ate food without oil on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. During Passion Week, when she fixed vegetables for him,
he told her,
is, either just carrots, or pure beets, or
"Cook them separately"—that
potatoes,
mixed up with each other. Of course, this was without oil. During the Christmas (Ad- vent) fast, he went without food during the last week, and Mondays, Wednesdays and
so that the vegetables were not
Fridays
would
watch
touch the food. If for some reason she was unable to do this, the food was prepared by Anna Nikolaevna Chijoff, a virgin of holy life who died recently, just two months ago in San Francisco. Her sister Sophia is still alive.
Here is an example of how people were attempting to poison him. Once after the Pas- chal Liturgy, having consumed the Holy Gifts and having come out to break the fast, he vomited. Anna Chijoff gathered the vomit and buried it in the garden. This was before the eyes of everyone. It was very possible that the guilty man was Priest Medvedyev, judging from what Fr. Peter Triodin told us later. It looks like this poisoner was a priest, if the vomiting occurred after the consuming of the Gifts, because the poison was placed into the zapeefka [cup of wine and _ water used to clean the chalice} or into the chalice
he bring
while
went without the food
oil. Olga Sememiuk herself, and would that no one would
he ate so

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 413
itself. This is similar to how Emperor Alexan- der IJI was poisoned. Emperor Alexander was poisoned by Dr. Zaharin, who later came to America and even boasted about it.
Olga Semeniuk was the president of the ladies committee which helped to found the orphanage. The ladies, seeing the impossibil- ity of Bishop John's idea of an orphanage, at first protested. But Olga began to go from door to door, to all the markets, to the gro- cer, to the baker, etc., and they would send food. Then benefactors were found, and thus the orpanage was begun. The ladies of the committee had been afraid to begin without any capital, actually without a penney.
Concerning this Priest Medvedyev, Fr. Peter Triodin told us what a repulsive per- sonality he had. During the time of the church upheaval in the early 1960's, he pub- lished in the Russian newspaper "The Dawn" terrible slander against Blessed John. But then when his end arrived, he begged for- giveness of Blessed John, and of course Vlad- ika rejoiced. Medvedyev and the editor of "The Dawn" had been Blessed John's avowed enemies. In Shanghai, Medvedyev had been outrageous.
Olga Ivanovna knew much about the bishop. When he arrived in Shanghai, they prepared for him white sheets, blankets, etc.. But then they saw that they laid there without being used, so they folded up the bedding and sent it to South America, to his
parents. Helene Y. Kontzevitch
Berkeley,
January 23, 1972
California

 414 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
77.
Blessed John the Quick-Hearer
As I promised, I'm writing for you two more remarkable events which took place as a result of my pleas to my dear Blessed John. In 1982, my Phillip, after the course of his medical treatment, wanted to go with me to America in order to visit all the holy places there. Since he had already visited America several times and knows enough Eng= lish to get by, I agreed to go with him. (Of course, I did it mostly for him, thinking that
it would be of great benefit to him). So much the more because an Archimandrite sent me a check in memory of my dear bishop, Bles- sed John, in order to cover the cost of a ticket; otherwise, of course, I would not be able to go. Somehow we scraped together en-~ ough for a ticket for Phillip, having econo- mized here and there. To tell you the truth,
I did not particularly
trip, especially because
Christmas, and this
would be away from my church during such great feast-days. It was only because of him that I agreed. But it happened that on the eve of our departure, when we had to buy the tickets, Phillip "happened to have" no money: he spent it, not having said anything to me, hoping that I would somehow find enough in my savings, of which I unfortun- ately had none. I was in despair and did not know what to do. I knew that if he realized
look it
was
forward was right
to this before
time I
the first

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 415
that we would not go, it would be a catastro- phe for his temperament. And then I turned to dear Archbishop John: "Dear Vladichenka, if you think that this trip is for the benefit of Phillip, then help us out. And if not, then I will endure anything that is inevitable in such a case."
And what do you think? That very day I received a notice from the post office that there arrived a money order of 7,700 franks made out to my name—exactly the sum of the needed ticket. I ran to the post office as fast as I could to find out if I could receive this money right away, or if I had to wait until they transferred it, as is always cus- tomary. It turned out that the money was already in the post office and that I could receive it without any difficulty. And they gave it to me right away, in spite of the fact
that I did not take with me any identification ecard, which they usually demand even to re- ceive a very small sum. I said nothing to Phillip until our return from America. I in- deed thanked the kind bishop. He, my dear one, always sees my troubles, and helps.
At the same time, when we were in Am- erica, I was able to buy red lampada glasses for church, since we have none like them in France. When we went to New York and other places, I absolutely forgot about them, even though I saw in churches those very lampadas. But when we were in the Sepulchre of Blessed John on the last day before our departure, at the very moment I entered that church I remembered that I need those glass- es. Then and there I at once bought them,

 416 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
and only sometime after I returned to France did I realize that it had been Blessed John who had reminded me about them, and that it had been precisely from his church that he had sent them to me.
And here is another case, just as re- markable. When Blessed John was with us, once he told us about the miracle of St. Archangel Michael in Chonae. He gave to me a little paper icon of this miracle, said that I should cover it with plastic and pointed to the spot where I should hang it. I did exactly as he said. But after the departure of Fr. Mitrophan, another priest was appoint- ed. He took that icon from the wall and put it somewhere. I asked him several times to return it to me, but he told me that he did not remember where he put it. Many years after the departure of Blessed John to the Lord, I tried to find exactly the same icon, but I couldn't find it. Then two years ago, going to church to light the lampadas, I re- membered that in a few days would be the feast-day of the miracle of St. Michael in
Chonae. Not giving account to myself, I spon- taneously said, "Dear Vladichenka, can you help me to find that icon?" And on that very day, I received a letter from Hieromonk T., in which there was this very icon. I immedi- ately covered it with plastic and hung it on the same spot which Blessed John had indi- cated to me. And you cannot imagine what a joy it was for me, what happiness.
I beg you to forgive me for such a long letter, but I am not capable of writing nor- mal letters. You yourself correct it. May our

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 417 Lord and His Holy Mother, through the pray-
ers of our dear and unforgettable John, protect you.
Loving you in the Lord,
unworthy Zinaida Paris,
Hierarch
Julem* France
1986
December 10/23,
78.
Help to the Lesna Convent
EDITOR'S NOTE: Several persons in France, as well as the sisters of the Lesna Convent, have informed us time and again of Blessed John's intercession in their private lives, as well as his being instrumental in finding the convent's new location, in Prove- mont.
I,
Dear Fathers,
You ask us in your letter of January
14/27 to tell you how Archbishop John Max- imovitch helped us to find the new location of our monastery.
But I am afraid that, although we firmly believe that Archbishop John performed many miracles, we have no proof that this was one.
of our coming to
know that our
a humdred years
Here Provement.
is the story You probably
con- ago (in 1885) with the blessing of the Optina
vent was
founded nearly
* See her memoirs in Part I, chapter 7.

 418 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
Staretz Amvrosy and St. John of Kronstadt— we have a letter of the latter in which he says, "I have always helped and always will help the Convent of Lesna."
Well, when we managed to escape from Communist Yugoslavia we were allowed to leave, but not to take any money with us; so we came to Paris penniless. Some Catholic sisters received us for four months until some Catholic monks, who owned a house in Four- queux, let it to us for 15000 fr. a month. One of our Russian friends asked our Abbess
(Mother
thought
said, "I
sand so I am quite indifferent to what sum
Theodora reposed to pay this rent.
have neither five
I must pay." "But what are you
counting something only real
upon?"
real."
thing
help of Our Lord, Our Lady and the Saints— it is I who am a realist, not you." It turned out that Matushka was perfectly right—we never failed to pay the rent.
asked he. "You "I am counting
must have upon the
in this world,"
said Matushka, "the
Some years later, when
was already in France, our landlords told
us we must either buy the
queux or leave it. We collected some of the
money
changed
bishop
couldn't allow our Vladika to become homeless so we gave him all the money we had collect- ed and he bought with it and the money he himself had, a house in Paris where there was a place for a church, too. Later he went
needed, their
when the minds. But
meanwhile Versailles. We
John had to leave
in 1976) how she Matushka calmly nor fifteen thou-
Archbishop John
house in Four- monks’ suddenly
Arch-

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 419
to the States and died suddenly, without re- paying all the sum we had_ given him. On October the 19th, the day of St.
John of Kronstadt we were told to leave Fourqueux, for the land was requisitioned by the government.
The old sisters who had known St. John personally and remembered his coming to Les- na said that there was no need to worry—Ba- tiushka would certainly give us _ something better than Forqueux—only we had no money to pay for it. But then the money began to arrive in a most miraculous way. We were sure it was Our Lady and St. John, but also
Vladika John repaying his debt, who sent it; but as you see we cannot prove the lat- ter's help nor even attribute all this solely to his prayers, although we know he always prays for us. He gave us a wonderful token of his loving care on the very day of his death. On that day he sent us a letter (evi- dently mailed just before Liturgy) in which there were only these few words: "I send my blessing to you all together and to each of you apart." We have no doubt that he knew he would die that day and sent us his
last blessing.
We ask for your blessing and holy pray-
ers.
With love in Christ,
Abbess Magdalina and all the sisters Provemont, France
January 22/February 4, 1981

 420 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
II.
The Clairvoyant One
During the time of the absence of Bless-
ed John from his home in Versailles, Lydia S. died in Medon near Paris. One of our sisters from the convent came to read the Psalter over the deceased. When Vladika returned to Versailles, his secretary P. 8S. Lopuchin began to report to him: "In Medon died..." The bishop interrupted him and said, "Yes, I know—Lydia. And the Psalter was read by a nun from the Lesna Convent." This was
exactly what had happened.
The Saint
There was in a hospital in Paris a cer-
tain sick Alexandra Lavrentievna Y., and the bishop was told about her. He relayed the message that he would come and give her Holy Communion. Lying in a common ward where there were some 40-50 people, she felt embarrassed before the French ladies that she would be visited by an Orthodox bishop garbed in extremely shabby clothing, and barefoot at that. When he gave her Commun- ion and left, the French woman in the adja- cent bed said to her, "How fortunate you are in having such a spiritual director. My sister lives in Versailles, and when her chil- dren get sick, she chases them out onto the street where that bishop usually walks, and she asks him to bless them. And always after this they get immediately well. We call him a saint."

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 421
The Healer
A certain Roman Catholic priest who vis-
ited the sick in Versailles would frequently come to Blessed John with a plea to pray or to visit his spiritual children, believing that this would give them healing, which often occurred.
We ask your blessing and holy prayers. With love in Christ,
deeply revering you,
unworthy Nun Anna
III.
Uncreated Light
..-An
an old nun from Lesna. When she and the other Sisters were living in Lesna, Blessed John often used to come up to one icon in
occurrence was related to
me by
the
God,
and
when
this nun came in and saw that...Blessed John was surrounded in radiant light and was standing not on the ground, but above it!
Zinaida V. dJulem
church, that of the which he apparently
Iveron liked
Mother of
much Once, he was thus praying before that icon,
before which he used to
Lesna Provemont,
Convent France
July 13/26,
1977
very pray.
Paris, Summer,
France 1978

 422 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
79.
Healing from Internal Poisoning
For the long duration of my collaboration with Archbishop John, I had time enough to evaluate him as a great man of prayer and of righteous life. I was working in the capa- city of church warden and secretary for a number of years. Aside from being in charge of the Western European Diocese, the Hier- arch also had under his supervision the French Orthodox Church of the Western Rite, which was and still is being intensely slan- dered. During his life, accusations multiplied against Archbishop John because of his sup- portive relations with this church. When Archbishop John received a new assignment
to the Western American
he was departing for San Francisco, he gave me instructions to remain in the French Orth- odox Church, to be in contact with them,
even to serve as
stration of the
was reorganized and moved to Geneva. The ruling archpastor, still as a vicar bishop, always warred against Archbishop John. Fr.
Diocese and when
a subdeacon. The admini- Western European Diocese
Mitrophan, who
Archbishop John's
San Francisco. Then B. N.
Paris, and soon after that Archbishop John unexpectedly died in Seattle.
In September of 1971, I became gravely ill. I was immediately operated on. The sur-
remained in departure,
France after also left for Trezvinsky left

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 423
geon said that it was not cancer of the intes- tines, but a severe case of bile poisoning, and at the same time I had a fit of appendici- tis. That night, after the operation, was an absolutely critical time. I myself and the med- ical personnel thought that I would not live until morning. They would constantly check my blood pressure. I would lose conscious- ness and then come back again, and all the time I intensely begged Archbishop John to pray for me so that God's will would be done. Through his prayers the blood pressure did not drop, and by morning I began to move and remained alive. And then everything re- turned to me: health, strength, vitality—and I felt as if I had become twenty years young- er.
A few days ago, I had a dream during the night. I saw Archbishop John, who was not in full vestments, but only had on an epitrachelion, the cross and the panagia. A staff was in his left hand—the usual black staff with which bishops walk outside of church services. I recognized this epitrachel- ion at once. On his head he did not have a mitre, but a black klobuk. With his right hand he blessed me, then silently indicated to me with his right hand to continue walking on the same path that he had indicated when he was leaving for San Francisco—that is, to go along the path of the French Orthodox
Church. Being well again, I understood that I should not rest and be inactive, but on the contrary should renew my activity in the same vein. This is my path. As it is written in the second epistle of St. Paul to Timothy:

 424 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. I have been defending the righteous Archbishop John. It seems this is my path.
I'm asking your prayers,
Vladimir Grabbe Bologne, France September, 1972
80.
Healing from Diptheria
If
Shanghai, each one of them will tell you that he or she was Vladika's favorite, and they honestly believe this. It's impossible not to believe it, because when Vladika looked at you, you were the only child in front of him, you were his love, everything. He was that concerned about you. It wasn't just the sup- erficial: "You are one of my children." It was genuine love.
...-I1 did have an unusual experience with Vladika. I was a very, very young girl at the time, and I was sick with diptheria. The doctor came in and the house had to be quar- antined. My parents tried to take me to the hospital, and the hospital was full. I remem- ber that I was kind of "in between," coming in and out of consciousness. Passing by the Cathedral, I thought, "Oh, I missed church, I missed the services today." And the next thing I remember, I was in the hos- pital and the nurse came out and said, "We have no beds. Take her back." So my par-
you talk to Russian people from

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 425
ents brought me back home, and I was really more or less in a coma most of the time. Then I had a wild dream that I was kind of sliding up and down the slides. My mother woke me up and said, "Vladika's here!" and “I thought, "What does he want? I want to sleep." I looked at him, and he said, "What's the matter with you? You would do anything to miss the service." Still looking at him, I said, "I want to sleep." "You can't," he said. "I have to tell you a joke." I could hardly keep my eyes open. I didn't under- stand what was happening: he was going to tell me a joke? He stood there and laughed, and believe it or not, he told joke after joke after joke until finally, by looking at him,
I started laughing because the whole
was funny. And when I laughed, I gagged. He called my mother and said, "She's all right now. Clean her up." My mother cleaned my mouth out. Everything had broken loose and I could breathe again. After my mother cleaned me up, he put his hand on my fore- head and said, "Now that you laughed at my joke, you can go back to sleep."
Clear up until a few years later I didn't even realize that this was a miracle. The only thing that was left over from the diptheria was that my voice got a little deeper, but other than that I survived. The Chinese doc- tor that took care of me had told my parents that I would not survive.
Valentina Harvey. Redding, California
February, 1982
thing

 426 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
81.
Healing from Meningitis
After World War II, Selma (Olga) Rodu- koft got meningitis in a very severe form. The doctors were sure that, if for any reason she recovered, she would be blind, deaf and mental. Archbishop John prayed for her and
she recovered completely.
here in Australia. She is quite old now and must be over eighty years old, but she has repeated this story many times.
Then there is another story about the vice-president of the Russian Committee at church, Chevelov, who tells the following account of herself:
Once she was very ill and the archbish- op came to visit her and said, "Get up!" She got up and was never sick since.
Asking your blessings,
St. Ives, Australia
EDITOR'S NOTE:
The author of the above testimony knew
Archbishop John from the very day of his arrival in Shanghai. Her sons were his aco- lytes and were also witnesses to his miracu- lous intercession. Later, she kept up a cor- respondence with him; and it is amazing how he, having such a busy schedule, would write meticulous and complete answers to any questions she would ask. It was she who was
Now she
is living
Nadia January
P. Pitts 23, 1987

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 427
first responsible for having accounts of Blessed John's miracles collected by Bishop Savva.
82.
Fire from Heaven
Our old nun, Mother Augusta, the following upon our: request:
wrote
"Forgive me for disturbing you. For a long time I was hesitating whether I should write about Archbishop John in Shanghai. But because I am in advanced years and can die soon, I do not want to carry into the grave that which the Lord showed me unto instruction. Indeed, Archbishop John had great faith.
"lI suffered very much... In 1939, I sent
my daughter to
husband met her
to his parents,
and then was commissioned to
he went away, the relatives told my daughter that she should leave their house. Not know- ing the language and being only 17 years old, she wrote despondent letters to me. I
prayed a lot. Two months passed by. I walk- ed every day to the Shanghai Cathedral, but my faith began to waver. So I decided not to go to church anymore, but instead to visit my friends; and thus I did not hurry to get up earlier. My path went by the Cathedral, and here I heard singing inside the church. I went inside. Vladika John was serving. The altar area was open. Vladika was saying the
Italy, on
to her the ship,
lived
husband. Her brought her with her for 11 days
Africa. When

 428 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
prayer, Take eat, this is My Body, and this is my Blood... for the remission of sins, and after this he got down on his knees and made a full prostration. At this time I saw the Chalice with the Holy Gifts uncovered, and at this time, after Vladika's words, a flame came down from above and descended into the Chalice. The form of the flame was like a tulip, but larger. I never in my life thought that I would see the actual sanctification of the Gifts as a flame. Faith was kindled in me once more. The Lord showed me Vladika's faith, and I was ashamed for my own faint- heartedness. ;
"] think that it would be good if you would add this incident to the biography— Life—of the archbishop. But please correct it and sign it the way you think best. For- give me and bless me."
Concerning this incident, Bishop Savva added the following:
"One can find a similar case in the Life of St. Sergius of Radonezh, which was writ- ten by St. Epiphanius the Wise, disciple of St. Sergius, soon after the repose of the Saint. Here is what is written in the life: Once St. Sergius was serving the Divine Lit-
urgy, and his disciple, Simon
arch, was
vision. He
was serving, he saw a fire that was moving along the table of oblation, lighting the altar table and the surrounding altar. When the Saint was preparing himself to receive Com- munion, the divine fire swirled like a kerchief and entered into the Holy Chalice. Thus did
present. Simon saw described how, when
the Saint
the _ ecclesi- a wondrous

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 429
the Saint receive Holy Communion. Seeing this, Simon was filled with awe and trembling. The Saint, stepping away from the table of oblation, understood that Simon had been vouchsafed to behold this wonderful yision, and, summoning him, he said, 'My child, why is your spirit disturbed?' And the other answered, ‘Master, I saw a wondrous vision; the Grace of the Holy Spirit is active with you.' The Saint then forbade him, saying, 'Do not tell anybody about what you
have seen, until the Lord calls me from this life.'
"This is what Dimitry of Rostov tells about another case: 'It is written in the Life of St. Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus, that this great hierarch of God possessed the God-given Grace of being vouchsafed to ap- prehend the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the prepared Holy Gifts during the time of the bloodless sacrifice. He did not stop the flow of prayer until he saw the descent of the Holy Spirit. Once when he was serving
and pronouncing the usual prayer of offer- ing, he did not see the sign of the coming
of the Holy
Spirit. Having
not yet finished the prayer,
he
started
again from. the beginning,
but
again the Holy
Spirit did not come. And so he did it a third time. Not seeing the Holy Spirit, he wondered, began
to cry and to mentally pray to God that he would be informed whose fault it was that the offered Gifts were being deprived of the Holy Spirit. Then, glancing at the deacon who stood on his left holding the fan, he saw that his face was dark with disturbance,

 430 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER disfigured as if he had leprosy. Then the
Saint took the
fan from him, saying with
meekness, "Child, abstain from receiving the
Divine Gifts, and go to your home." Having
dismissed the deacon from the divine altar,
the holy Epiphanius again saw the .Grace of
the Holy Spirit coming upon the offered
Gifts. After finishing the Divine Liturgy,
the Saint summoned the deacon, asking what
kind of sin he had done, which had inter-
fered with the coming of the Holy Spirit up-
on the honorable Gifts. And the deacon then
confessed the truth, that the preceding night
he had been together with his wife... Then
Saint Epiphanius, calling all priests and dea-
cons and all his clergy, told them, "Oh child-
ren, if you want to be worthy of serving
in the altar, loosen the shoes of your fleshly,
irrational passions. Do not enter the divine
altar tied with lustful inclinations, and listen
to the Apostle, who said, they that have
wives be as though they have none’ (I Cor.
7:29) .i
I, too, can testify: When I visited Holy Trinity Monastery in Jordanville, New York, during the funeral of our father in the Lord, Metropolitan Anastassy, there occurred the following incident, which then did not strike me at all as something extraordinary. I stood together with Mother Mariamna in the monas- tery church. We decided to receive Christ's Holy Mysteries, and I went to have Confes- sion. When I returned to my place, Nun Mari- amna hastily told me that some God-fearing woman wanted to talk with me, and, pointing

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 431
her out to me, went also to have Confession. The indicated lady, absolutely unknown to me, began to relate about her sick husband, who was a foreigner and whose name I do
not remember exactly. She added that wished very much to see and talk to Arch- bishop John, who had come from Shanghai and was now living with us in San Francisco. We stood in church quite far from the altar. As soon as she finished uttering these words, I saw Archbishop John come out of the altar and direct himself straight toward us. This was long before the reading of the Hours before the Liturgy. Seeing him, I said to
the lady, "Here
approached the
the bishop and
would like to have a talk with you." And suddenly I clearly heard Blessed John saying hurriedly, "I know, I know." I stepped a- side, not wishing to be in the way of their talking. Soon she returned to me all in tears and posed the question to me: "Who could have told the bishop about my misfortune? The bishop told me that he knows everything and that he's praying..." Then and there the bishop had given soul-saving instructions to that unfortunate woman.
About this incident, it is interesting to note that Archbishop John, being in the altar, could in no way have heard our con- versation, for it was—as I said before—quite far from the altar, and we spoke very softly. How did he find out about her sorrow? What made him come out to her before she could have had time to address herself to him?
comes ambo,
said,
the bishop." Then I indicated the lady to
"This slave
of God
she

 432 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
This, of course, remains a mystery. At any rate, this case is a new proof of the clair- voyance of the bishop, since he had never met that woman before. Moreover, this is a demonstration of the great care. that
the bishop had his prayerful
them—in not even
towards people's sorrow and intercession before God for where those in sorrow did
cases
express their sorrows to him.
Abbess Ariadna Convent of Our Lady of Vladimir San Francisco, California
1967
83.
Call to Repentance
Dear Fathers,
Blessed John does not only intercede
to bring us help and healing, but to teach us valuable lessons as well:
Recently a friend of mine and myself
were around by one of the monks. He told of the various holy men that were buried at the monastery. We venerated the relics of St. Seraphim, St. John the Baptist, the saints of the Kiev
Caves, and even a thread from the robe of
visited Jordanville Monastery. We
treated quite graciously, shown
the blessed
magnificently
visited the
given, to our great
piece of a robe that Blessed John had worn.
Theotokos. painted
bookstore
We prayed in the church and _ finally where we were each
and unexpected joy, a

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 433
We left the monastery holding our treasures, marvelling at such a great outpouring of love.
One would think that such an outpouring would turn into charitable acts on my part as well, but such was not the case. When we returned to the city, we were met by an- other good friend whom I took aside and told the whole story. He asked me if he might have a section of the piece. I snipped off a tiny little piece for him, keeping most of it for myself.
Later, when we were parting, my other friend who had been present with me at Jor- danville, cut his piece in half and gave it to my other friend. I promptly asked for the little piece I had given him back, figuring that he did not need two pieces.
We parted company and I proceeded on my journey to another city, where I reached into my pocket for the large piece of the robe that I was carrying and it was gone. I tore my suitcase apart, and all of my clothing, looking through them 5 or 6 times, but it was nowhere to be found. I felt such a sense of loss. The only piece that I had left of Archbishop John's robe was the tiny little piece that I had given my friend and had taken back. The realization of my stinginess was upon me. I called the other city where I had been but the piece was nowhere to be found there either. I suddenly knew that Blessed John had taught me a hard-learned lesson about the fruits of covetousness.
Days later, the piece was found by my friend's daughter, who looked at a small icon

 434 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
of Archbishop John and remarked that his robe's color looked exactly like a piece of ribbon she had been playing with in church the other day. He went to the church and there was the piece sitting in the middle of the room...like Archbishop John had let the piece be found when I had repented of my error. When the piece was returned, I
promptly cut it in two and gave it to another friend. I have half of the big piece and the tiny piece on the shrine in my icon corner, but the little piece constantly reminds me of the dear Saint's intercession for the salva- tion of my soul.
Yours in Christ,
84,
Hearkening to the Call of the Dying
On the fourth week of Great Lent, after Liturgy, a lady approached me and gave me a closed envelope, saying that this was what she wrote about our late Archbishop John. Before flying out of Vancouver, B. C., I opened the letter and read what was a clear proof of Blessed John's clairvoyance... Later, I called up the lady, asking her to verify that in her letter she had witnessed the truth
of the described incident, which she did. This was Helen Michailovna Brynner, a woman from a well-known family in pre-revolutionary Russia. These were very wealthy people, mil-
Atlanta, February
J. M. Georgia 3, 1987

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 435
lionaires, and also well known to all Russians of the Far East. Of course, she lost all her material wealth in Russia, but in place of it she acquired spiritual riches, which are incomparable to material wealth. [She was the aunt of the famous movie star Yul Bryn- ner]. Here is what this servant of God, Helen Michailovna, wrote in the _ afore- mentioned letter:*
This took place in Shanghai in 1948. I used to live right next to the hospital of the Russian Orthodox Brotherhood. A nurse from there used to visit me every day to give injections. I was sick.
One day she came to me in a state of great excitement and told me what had hap- pened that night when she had been on night duty. At about 3 a.m. she was called to a seriously sick man, who asked her to immed-
iately call Bishop John because he felt very bad. He felt that he was dying, and request- ed that the bishop come and give him Holy Communion. The night was very stormy: a ty- phoon was raging with a most ferocious down- pour. The wind blew down electric wires. The nurse answered the dying man that she could not fulfill his request because the telephone was not working, and because she was alone in the whole hospital and could not possibly leave it. The sick man was very
upset and kept repeating that
he must at
once see the promised him
bishop. The nurse that aS soon as a new
then nurse
* The above
was written by Bishop
Savva (see Pravoslavnie Rus, 1971, no. 19, p. 6).

 436 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
would arrive, at 6 a.m., she would then at once rush to the bishop and would give the bishop his request.
Then all of a sudden, after about 30-40 minutes, a strong knocking was heard at the gates. To the inquiry of the sleeping watch- man, "Who is there?" —there was an answer: "Open up the gate! I am Bishop John—I am being called, I am expected." The watchman opened. The bishop quickly crossed the yard
and went into the hospital. Seeing the nurse who opened the door for him, he asked: "Where is here a seriously sick man who is expecting me? Lead me to him."
I read in your articles, dear Vladiko [Savva], descriptions of many cases of mira- culous healings and clairvoyance of the late Archbishop John, and that is why I wrote
this true incident for you: how Blessed John perceived the thought and need of the seri- ously sick man and went deep into the night to answer that call, drenched in a downpour of rain and terrifying wind.
Unquestionably this is another new fac- tual proof of Archbishop John's gift of clair-
voyance.
Helen M. Brynner Great Lent, April, 1971
85e
Help After a Lung Operation
Upon returning home from a trip to Van- couver, B. C., I found a letter from my friend, an engineer who lives in San Francis-

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 437
co, dated April 5th of this year. Among other things he writes the following:
"To the cases of help which occurred through the prayers of Archbishop John, another incident has been added. One of the choir singers in the Burlingame [California] church had a lung surgically removed on
Thursday. On
whom we knew from China, called on the tel- ephone and, weeping, told us that his wound would not heal and that the bleeding had not stopped after already two days. I told her that she should at once come [to the Sepul- chre of Blessed John] and we all would be there and serve a Panikhida for Archbishop John.
"The Panikhida was served at 3:30 p.m.. When she returned after the Panikhida to the hospital, they told her that. the bleeding stopped and that the danger to her husband's life had passed. Her husband is al- ready home; and, although he is very slow in recovering, he nevertheless did not die, as the the doctors had expected. Father Mitro- phan, who serves Panikhidas at the grave of Archbishop John, can tell you about sev- eral similar cases...
"The Sepulchre is now enlarged thanks to our efforts; and the iconographer Pimen Sofronov has already painted three murals— full-length icons of Christ, Golgotha and the Protection of the Most Holy Mother of God. By Pascha it will be almost finished. A lot of people come to pray in it. They sell can- dles, which people place before icons—more
Saturday his wife, our friend

 438 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
than 100 dollars worth per week.
"It is an undeniable fact that a lot of
eases of miraculous help occurred during Blessed John's life. But the fact that miracu- lous healings have begun at his grave after his death—is indeed very comforting. The Lord said: 'To whom shall I look, and where shall I dwell, but to him who is calm and
humble, and 66:2).
"Wasn't
trembles at My word?' (Isaiah
Blessed
John indeed like that?"
Bishop Savva Great Lent, April, 1971
86.
Help for a Respiratory Infection
When I was in San Francisco (continues Bishop Savva), one day after the Divine ser- vice in the new cathedral a certain former member of the Cathedral Parish Council, Mr. Victor Shakaloff, took me to my apartment in his car. On the way he told me how his little son Dimitry, nicknamed Dima, had been sick when he was two and a half years old. They took him to the hospital. The doctors diagnosed some foreign virus: in _ other
words, his
The infection began to spread and the boy was choking in unbearable suffering. The doctors then said that only prayer could help, that they were helpless to do anything. Shakaloff, the boy's father, became horrified.
respiratory system was infected.

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 439
He at once called St. Tikhon of Zadonsk Or- pahage and asked that Archbishop John come to the telephone. He was informed that the bishop was serving and could not come to the phone. Then he at once left the hospital and rushed to the orphanage. The hierarch by then was at a Parish Council meeting. When he saw Shakaloff, he at once went to him, placed his hand on the man's shoulder and said: "Victor, go home, go home—I pray- ed." Mr. Shakaloff went home, asking others to pray for the saving of his son.
Early in the morning he went to the hospital and met the doctors, who had happy faces! They told him that a miracle had taken place, which was incomprehensible to them: the boy had simply begun to breathe normal- ly, without any hindrance. In 3-4 days the father took his boy home absolutely healthy.
Shakaloff said that one day, about a year and a half later when the boy was al- ready four years. old, Archbishop John served in the Burlingame church and noticed Shakaloff's son in the crowd of people. "Dima, Dima," he called, "come here and hold my staff!" Dima walked up and held Blessed John's staff during the rest of the service.
And then Shakaloff testified: "Let them say all the slander they want about Arch- bishop John: I am convinced that it was first
of all through his prayers that my son was delivered from death.
Victor Shakaloff April, 1971"

 440
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
87.
Saving of Two Lives
I.
One elderly lady (approximately 70 years a good believing Christian from San Francisco, recounted to me in detail her mir-
aculous healing, only begging me, for some special reason, not to mention her name in print.
Once she was carrying boxes and pack- ages to the post office. Having entered the postal building, she slipped because the floor was wet and slippery. She fell face down and her breast, near the right arm, hit a box. After some time she noticed that beneath the bruise there developed a lump the size of an apple. Gradually it began to bother her. She shared this with another lady, whose son had been healed from some terrible mala- dy through Archbishop John's prayers, when all the doctors had been unable to help his fatal illness. So this lady advised her to turn to Archbishop John with a letter and ask him to pray for her. At that time Archbishop John lived in France and had not yet moved to San Francisco. And so she began to write a letter to him. She wrote half a letter and stopped, thinking: "It isn't right to write to Archbishop John so hurriedly—one should think it through, so that the letter is pro- perly written." And so the letter was never finished.
old),

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS
441
Archbishop
from France for a
month or
a church.
came up to the bishop for a blessing. He blessed her, then held her hand for a while, looked carefully into her eyes and asked:
"Did you write to me?"
"No, Your Eminence," she answered, "lI did not write to you."
After a few days she was again in the church when Blessed John was serving, and again when she approached for his blessing
[as all the people did at the end of the ser- vice], he asked her the second time whether she had written to him. And she again, as before, answered that she had not.
She was very surprised: how did Bles- sed John Know that she had begun to write him a letter, since nobody knew about that?
I forgot to ask her why she answered Blessed John that she had not written to him:
Not arrived in
long afterwards, San Francisco
John
two. One day
After the service, the sick lady
was it
letter,
not say
letter but had not finished it and mailed it off?
A few days after that, the pain increas- ed a great deal and this compelled her to go to the archbishop and to ask him to pray for her. I assume she went to see him at the St. Tikhon of Zadonsk Orphanage. She was brief, saying to him: "Holy Vladyko, I am very sick. I beg you—pray for me!"
"I shall pray," the archbishop answered. After that she went home. That evening,
because she had never mailed the or because she was startled and did
that she had
started to write the
he was serving in

 442 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
before going to bed she noticed that on the sore spot the swelling had bulged out. In the morning, as she got up—that very moment the swelling broke and blood gushed out pro-
fusely. She was taken to
once a Russian woman-doctor
and was very surprised. She advised immed- iate surgery, which was done at once. After two months, this woman-physician told her that she had cancer in a very malignant form and that she, according to medical observa- tion, should have lived at most 3-4 days after the operation, or as an exception 30-40 days. But the fact that she remained alive—was a miracle!
Concluding her story, she said to me: "You see, Your Eminence, already five years have elapsed since my operation, and I'm still alive, and nothing bothers me any longer in connection with the surgery and my can- cer. I firmly believe that the outcome was so successful only because of the prayers of the late Archbishop John."
When this lady was telling me all this, Blessed John had already passed away. She told me all this last year, not long after the repose of the archbishop: I forget whether it was after the funeral or after the 40th day after his death, when I again went to San Francisco for his memorial.
IT.
The sister of my brother-in-law, from
Canada, was literally prayed to life from cer- tain death by Archbishop John. The arch- bishop kept visiting her in the _ hospital,
the hospital. At
examined
her,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 443
where she was lying with both her lungs rip- ped open, her ribs broken, and in immense suffering. It was a car accident.
When she was hospitalized the first time, her face was swollen like a pillow, so _ that her eyes were not visible, but she was con- scious. When I said that Blessed John was standing next to her, she opened her eyelid with her fingers and saw him. Then _ she grabbed his hand and pressed it to her lips— for she could not speak due to the tube in her torn throat. From the cracks (instead of eyes) there poured out tears of joy.
After that initial time the bishop visited her several times and she began to recover.
One time
stepped
hospital,
requiring
having
"Mousia is in critical condition now." Then he went to her, drew the curtain near her bed and prayed there for a long time at her side. Meanwhile, two doctors arrived and I asked them point blank: how critical was her condition, and should we tell her daughter— from whom we had concealed that her mother had a car accident so as not to upset her too much—to come from Canada? Both doctors answered me: "Whether to call her relative or not—is your business, but we do not
guarantee that she will live till morning..." Glory be to God—since that night she not only survived, but got well and went back to Canada. After the death of our bles-
sed archpastor, she wrote to me expressing
we came there and—as soon as we
into the common
ward of the
city patients John, not heard anything yet, said to us:
where
intensive care—Blessed
there were located

 444 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
her sympathy and gratitude to his memory. She mentioned that she was in good health, a year having passed by.
She and her sister, who was behind the wheel when the accident occurred, were tel- ling us that they believe that it was of course the prayer of Blessed John that saved her.
Her name is Maria Tuscia.
Bishop Savva May, 1967
88.
Healing for a Paralyzed Arm
I am testifying to the healing of the contorted, paralyzed arm of myself, Alexand- ra Ilyinichna Mullins, through the prayers of our Blessed John (Maximovitch).
This took place in 1964. My arm began to hurt terribly. I at once turned to doctors for help. Different physicians used different methods but nothing helped. My arm stopped bending at the elbow, and I of course could not hold a job any longer. Believing in the power of the prayers of our Blessed John, I asked him several times to pray for me, but the hierarch evidently was testing my faith in God. Every time he would bless me, he would say: "Pray to God."
A year passed by. I considered that I was already becoming a cripple, since all the doctors' medications failed to help. Then I again turned with a request to the bishop,

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 445
that he would ask the Lord and touch my ailing arm. The bishop, as always, became very serious: his eyes turned to heaven and he placed his hand on the sore spot on my arm and began to pray. With strong faith and hope I also prayed to the Lord God. And so several days passed by and my contorted arm became flexible and I began to work. A feeling of infinite gratitude to the Lord God and His worthy servant and man of prayer, compels nie to inform all believing people about this miracle wrought through the
prayers
of our
beloved
San
Archbishop
Alexandra July
John.
Mullins 25, 1968
1258 — 13th Ave. Francisco, California
89,
Help in Finding Work
Be not faithless, but believing. (John 20:27)
My eldest daughter was looking for em- ployment for a long time, and all in vain. Due to her lack of success, she fell into total depression. I also felt very bad because of her lack of success, but I strove not to show this because there was no way I could console her.
During this time I was given as a gift a little missionary magazine "The Orthodox Word," along with a Russian language supple- ment entitled "Blessed John Maximovitch,"

 446 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
which attracted my attention. I automatically began to read it.
I did not know Archbishop John, but I knew that he had a lot of people who re- vered him for his life and prayer and that he now rested under the newly built Cathed- ral, in a Sepulchre specially prepared for him. Suddenly I was enlightened by the thought of asking the prayers of Blessed John to help find a job for my daughter.
Involuntarily I knelt and began to cry uncontrollably and simply implore’ Blessed John with my request. That was in the middle of the week. On Saturday of that same week I called my daughter again, without any hope
of hearing anything consoling.
the same question concerning
denly heard a spark of hope,
other girls had applied for the one position she wanted.
Not giving it a thought, I told her to come to me at once so that we could pray to one Orthodox hierarch about whom I had read a few days before and found to be a man of great prayer. She came at once and I said to her, "Daughter! You are a Catholic. But this hierarch prayed for all." I showed her the photograph of him in the magazine.
"Let us pray together."
So we prayed as best as we knew how,
kneeling and bitterly weeping. We prayed, we begged...
One Monday my daughter called me up and said, "Mother, I got the job. I'm going to work." This was so unexpected that I at once simply froze, sensing only one thing,
Asking her work, I sud- although ten

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 447
that Blessed John
had heard us. Now my daughter, with
God's help,
= successfully works. Everyone treats her well
and she is happy with both
the people and the work. Praying to Blessed John, she
expressed a desire to be a member of the Archbishop John Maximovitch Fund of Los’ Angeles’ and began to ask to be sent literature on Arch- bishop John. Glory be to our God.
Z. Sylvonic Los Angeles, California August 17, 1971
90.
A Health-Restoring Vision
With deep sorrow did we find out about the sudden, unexpected demise of the deeply revered, unforgettable, dear and much-loved Blessed Hierarch, Archbishop John Maximov- itch, whose light-bearing memory
never will be erased and to whose prayerful
help we are hastening in the moments of life's hard- ships.
I wish to share a vision I had.
Six or seven years ago, I was expecting
a visa from my daughter in America, as I was living temporarily in France. One Monday
I received a letter from my daughter, who asked me to meet her in a station on the fol- lowing Sunday. That same day I answered her that of course I would meet her. And that very day, on Monday, I got terribly sick: my temperature was almost 40° C., there was a pain in my side and a dry cough

 448 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
—all symptoms of pneumonia or pleurisy. In spite of all the attempts of the doctors, there was no improvement and I was in a desperate
state, thinking that I would meet my daughter. Friday
not be able to morning I began to the holy Archbishop
to pray intensely
John. That afternoon I clearly saw in reality the holy hierarch come in full vestments with a staff and sit down on a chair near my bed! Overwhelmed and in utter happiness, I stretched my hands out to him for his bles- sing, but the vision disappeared and there was nothing. Then I got up, went to the tab- le and poured a glass of water. After drink- ing it, I went again to lie down. Not even a minute passed. The bishop appeared for a second time in the same_ vestments, standing with his staff near my door. I jump- up from the bed—and no one was there! Con- soled and happy, I laid down again, quite assured that everything would be all right. So I fell into a peaceful sleep for the first time in the course of my sickness. The next day, having had a 40° temperature, I got
up; although I was still quite weak, I was absolutely healthy with a 37° temperature— and all my sickness was at once gone. The power of the prayers of our unforgettable Blessed John, in the duration of a few hours, got me on my feet.
_ Unforgettable, dear Blessed John, pray to God for us!
A Note: In spite of the fact that I was then 67 years of age, whenever he would serve, no matter how long the services would last, I would never feel any fatigue or hard-

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 449
ship from the long standing; quite the oppo- site, some unearthly happy feeling would en- velope not only me but my children also, and the wonderful vision I here described is in- delibly impressed on my mind.
Our dear Holy Hierarch, do not forget us in your holy prayers, and we shall never forget you.
Nadezhda Vladimirovna Levitskaya May 22, 1967 200 West 109th St., Apt. 134
New York, New York
91.
Rescue from an Obsession with Obedience
I consider it my duty to inform you a- bout my miraculous deliverance thanks to the prayers of Archbishop John. After the repose of my late husband I wrote a letter with a request that I be accepted into the Lesna Convent. For ten years I had had a great longing, a fervent wish for this; and Mother Abbess Theodora and Father Elder Nicander agreed to accept me into the convent. I was so happy that I at once sold and gave away all my possessions and speedily travelled all the ‘way to this long-awaited convent. There 1 stayed about four years, when sud- denly something strange began to occur with me: I would eat nothing for two weeks in a row; I would not drink or take any medi-
cation; for whole days and nights in a row

 450 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
I would sit up in bed, not leaving my cell, and would hardly talk to anyone, uttering just separate words only if there was a need. Mother Abbess Theodora visited me several times, warning me that if I would not begin to eat she would be compelled to send me to a hospital; but everything was in vain because I was convinced that I was doing all this as an obedience to the elder. So I was sent to a mental hospital, where I stayed several months; but since that hospital was quite a distance from the monastery, they would come to get me before great feasts and take me to the monastery for a few days. Oh, how happy I was and thankful to be at
least a few days in my after a few days they me to the hospital.
dear convent! But would again return
My friends
about this, collected some money and sent one friend to bring me back. Since at that time I also had a bad case of rheumatism— which caused my fingers on both hands not to bend any longer and my shoulders, elbows and knees to ache a lot—I agreed to go for a while back to a warm climate to get some health back, if, that is, Mother Abbess and the elder would bless. I received the blessing and flew back to Venezuela, burning with the desire to return as soon as possible to my own dear convent. But the Lord judged otherwise... Here I got very sick again, and my “strikes of famine" began to reoccur more often so that I almost never left the hospital, often fainting or simply collapsing from ex- cessive weakness. Thus I spent all the time
from
Venezuela found out

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 451
lying (dressed) in bed. Especially before great feasts I would stop eating and drinking altogether, and no one was able to talk me out of it. As a result, instead of going to church I would end up in a_ hospital.
Yes, I could pray then, but in secret, short snatches, quickly uttering some little fragmentary phrase from a prayer and also quickly crossing myself, as if someone was not allowing me to pray. Once while lying in bed I clearly saw the heads of Mother Ab- bess Theodora and Elder Nicander over me, and both were clearly saying to me, "Do not eat anything and do not drink." And I, a silly one, was obedient and after that was again several times in the hospital because of my "strikes of famine." Poor Father Nican- der used to write to me that I was listening not to him but to the enemy, and that I should force myself to eat and drink; but the deceiver so convinced me that I was doing the wish of my elder. I was listening to the enemy, being convinced that I was being obedient to the elder.
Once Father Nicander wrote to me that I should at once write to you, Father Mitro- phan [in San Francisco], asking for the prayers of Archbishop John for my healing. I am very thankful to you, Father Mitrophan, that you wrote to me so quickly, saying that you served a Panikhida at Blessed John's Sepulchre and are praying to him for my healing. Yes, and also Abbess Theodora, in Father Nicander's letter, confirmed her total
agreement with him. In your letter you sent me the grace-filled little piece of cotton and

 452 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
instructed me to stand before the holy icons and pray thusly: "Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, through the prayers of Archbishop John, heal me a sinner"—and with this holy cotton to make three signs of the cross over my forehead, saying every time: "In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit," which I do with faith every morning. In such a way I prayed for 30 days, as you wrote to me, but already after 21 days I was healed. This is how it happened:
One day when all of us were called to have breakfast, I did not go (I live in the Diocese Old-Age Home). Then the manager of this home came up to me and offered to bring me a cup of tea, so that at least I'd
drink
when
were
the thought that I had been repeating in my mind: "Only do not be obedient; on no ac- count be obedient." And—totally unexpected to myself—I suddenly jumped out of bed and quickly and decisively went to the kitchen, where I drank two cups of coffee with milk. After that I began to eat and drink normally, my strength came back to me and the merci- ful Lord enlightened me that this had been a demonic state of "prelest," which had last- ed for two years. When I told that to the local priest, Father Sergius Gudzenko, he replied by saying, "Father Nicander and my- self knew it" (since they evidently exchanged letters about me, as I assume).
After my healing through the prayers of Blessed John, the next day—from the very
some tea, all finished
but I refused. breakfast and
And then the tables
cleaned, I suddenly became
aware of

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 453
beginning of the day—the enemy ferociously attacked me, so that I could not pray prop- erly, sitting in my cell as usual. All the time I would invent some sort of work, would take rides to town on business, so as to get dis- tracted from the attacks of the enemy. Often I would enter my room, stand in prayer be- fore the icons, repeat sentences of prayers,
cross myself, make prostrations and leave the room again. My arms and legs trembled. I could not endure it any longer and went to Father Sergius. I told everything to his Matushka, and she read the prayers of exor- cism over me and I at once peacefully went home. But this was still not the end of the enemy's attacks, although they were consid- erably lessened. The enemy began to attack me every night, from evening till morning, but that was only several times. I made a firm resolve not to give in; I resisted, asking the Lord to help, and the Lord helped.
For some reason, the enemy would attack with greater strength when I would lie down in bed, so that for two weeks I would both fall asleep and war with the enemy while sit- ting in an armchair. Because of this my feet became so swollen that I could not put on shoes and had to walk in night slippers. But from the beginning of Passion Week up to today—glory be to God—, all is quiet.
Asking for your prayers and blessing,
sinful Galina Hockheim Valencia, Venezuela
May 11/24, 1972

 454 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
92.
Returning of a Loved One
After having read the book Blessed John Maximovitch (in Russian), which 1 bought at his Sepulchre, I got all stirred emotionally and decided to add more to my descriptions
(see pp. 360-365). Here is another incident which was told to me by my client of many years, whom I trust and believe. She has as a tenant a good, hard-working young wo- man, who endured a lot of suffering... The girl met a man who was divorced and had a son from his first marriage. She fell in love with him and they got together. A little girl was born and she again became pregnant, when he became infatuated with another woman, leaving her and her child without any support. The poor girl was in despair. She
went to the Sepulchre of and cried and prayed
Archbishop John before. his’ tomb. Meanwhile, the grandmother of the man
who is now her husband wrote to him a let- ter, reminding him that in their family many had died of cancer and that if he would not marry the girl and legitimatize the children, then he also may be punished by the Lord with the same fate. And he heeded this. He returned to the good girl and married her. A baby boy was born to them and was bap- tized. My client (and their landlady) became the godmother. Both parents are working, and their life has entered a normal routine thanks to the prayers of him who heard the

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 455
pleas of human suffering when they were ad- dressed to him.
This is what I felt obliged to inform. The story is not complex and perhaps too usual for outsiders; but what sorrow assails a loving heart when it loses the object of
its love! Blessed John knew that!
Glory vouchsafed
be to our to live and
Lord that we were
Vera C. Terehov October 15, 1971 San Francisco, California
| 93.
Reading of Thoughts
such a righteous man
pray
as our late Hierarch
John! May his
memory
be
blessed.
I was once in church when Archbishop
John was serving. The service seemed to me very long and tiresome. Being very fatigued, I thought to myself: "I wish the bishop would shorten the service a little." But I continued to stand patiently. After the service, as was the custom, I, together with all the people, went up to the hierarch for a blessing, when suddenly he said to me:
"If you cannot stand for a long time and your feet hurt, then you can sit down or even better leave the church, since your apartment is close to the church."
I was taken aback and at the same time amazed how easily Blessed John read my
together with eternal and

 456 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER thoughts in church.
T. B. 1967
94. Clairvoyant Fearlessness
I am sending you two photographs: one of Archbishop John... and a shot of the Shanghai "Surety of Sinners" Cathdral. It is located in the French Concession and it has three altars: one side altar to St. Inno- cent of Irkutsk and the other to Apostle Sim- on Zelotes. I lived right across from it.
In 194? there occurred a conflict be- tween the Chinese and Japanese. The Chinese drew up forces and opened fire across the
English Concession on the battleships
which The be-
stood at anchor on the Wampoo battleships were near the shore,
River. hidden
hind a large, long
which there were 36 apartments. In the mid- dle of this house was located our Orthodox church. The Chinese gunmen were shooting this building and destroyed all the apartments in it to their foundation. At the first firing, the people who lived there ran away from their apartments. The news reached Blessed John that all the apartments on the right and the left of the church were totally destroyed. On the first floor, where there had previous- ly been a kitchen, a medical supply was cen- tered. A shell fell into it and all the glass jars and even shelves were destroyed—but the apartment with the church in it has been
terraced
building, in

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 457
preserved. The walls are all intact, with not even a crack in them. No one believed this rumor. But Archbishop John decided to visit
this church at night, when no one
even the streets of the Concessions.
he came to a bridge over a canal, he was stopped by Japanese guards. Since the Jap- anese did not understand him, one of them ran for a Japanese interpreter,. who said to the bishop that one could not walk the streets to the church because the Chinese infantry was engaged in a battle with the Japanese marines along the entire street. One could clearly hear the firing. And so the interpretor said, "You are going to a certain death."
But the bishop requested a written per- mit to go there anyway. Then the interpreter ran back and brought him the permit from the headquarters.
Blessed John walked down the dark street, and when he came out into the firing zone, the firing stopped as he crossed it and then again continued behind him.
He visited the church and returned the same way. Later he related that in the whole house even the window glass was untouched, and that not a single icon had fallen down from its place. And when he walked back
guard gave they were walked him
Here is a description of how Archbishop John saw the soul of a man and read his
across
him the
amazed,
there and back.
the bridge, the Japanese military salute because
saying that God had
walked When

 458
thoughts: As
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
mentioned above, I used to live from the "Surety of Sinners" One Saturday evening they rang
across
Cathedral.
the bells at 6 o' clock for the Vigil, and I went to the gates of the cathedral. I wanted to receive Holy Communion that Sunday, but I must say that I did not tell anyone about
it.
As I approached the cathedral gates,
I saw that from the other end Blessed John was coming, evidently returning from a visit to the hospital of the "Orthodox Brother- hood." I came up for a blessing. The bishop asked me, "You will receive Holy Communion tomorrow?"
"No, Vladiko!" I answered.
"But why?" he asked.
"Actually, I wanted to, but I visited
Basil Ivanovich and he offered me a little meat cutlett." (Although at that time there was no fast, I would always abstain from meat before receiving Holy Communion).
"But what is on your soul?" asked the bishop.
"Tl repent, Vladiko," I replied.
"Then what does meat have to do with it? I bless you to receive Communion," he said, and went away!
Monk Nestor Levitin August 28/September 10, 1969
Syracuse, New York

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 459
95.
The Saint’s Healing of Those Who
Turned Against Him
Having learned that you are gathering material concerning the late Archbishop John of Shanghai, I consider it my duty to inform you of the occurrences of help from the pray- ers of Blessed John, of which I was a witness through the words of people well known to me personally.
1.) There was a case of the healing of a young girl, T.. She became completely in-
capacitated while living in Tubabao [Philip- pines]. From the Russian Camp there she was transferred to the hospital. At that time Blessed John was absent. The girl was a for- mer student of the Shanghai Russian Gymna- sium (High School), where during her time Blessed John had also taught. It was he who managed to get all the Russian refugees out of Shanghai. At the time of her illness he was not in Shanghai, but wrote letters to the Russians in the camp. This girl also received
a
be
she
girl
to
she had received a refusal due to her expos- ure to tuberculosis.
2.) In the Shanghai hospital a Latvian lady was placed amidst Russians. She told
letter from him, well." This was
saying, "Pray! All will either in 1950 or 1951:
does not recall T. became well
exactly.
and received a_ permit
Soon the _ sick come to the U.S.A., whereas previously

 460
me
the
into the hospital and began to distribute small pieces of prosphora among the sick, coming close to each one. He also came up to her, but she said to him, "I am not Orthodox, but I ask you very much to pray for me." Archbishop John told her that it was all right if she was not Orthodox and gave her a piece of prosphora. After visiting everyone, Bles- sed John left.
"Soon I got well and left for the U.S.A. I believe in the power of Blessed John's prayer and I know that it was he who healed me" —this is how Maria Osolin concluded her account concerning her healing.
3.) A person of high clerical calling con- tracted a cold, but the usual measures did not help. Every day at 4 p.m. the tempera- ture would rise considerably. The physicians could not diagnose the ailment, and the sick man would get much weaker. On one of my visits to him, he told me, "I decided to send a request to Archbishop John to pray for me, a sinner." Archbishop John at that time was in France. As soon as Archbishop John
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER personally, when she was already in the
U.S.A., how one day Blessed John
came
received the
sick one to
once became
1955, in California. At that time the abaove- mentioned cleric deeply honored Archbishop John and had reverence for him; but in the course of time his attitude, as also that of many others, changed for the worse towards Blessed John, and he forgot about the re-
letter with the request of the
pray
absolutely well. That was in
for him,
the sick one at

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 461
ceived healing. This case of healing I can confirm with an oath in the presence of that man who received healing through the holy prayers of Archbishop John.
4.) A healing from a severe illness. A certain Mr. A. K. became sick, complaining of dizziness, nausea and general weakness. Tests showed that in his middle ear there appeared water. The hospital treatment did not help, and his condition became worse. Soon he fell into a coma, barely breathing. They gave him oxygen. Following my advice they sent a telegram to Blessed John in France, with a request to pray for the seri- ously sick man. The very next day the sick- ness was gone as if it had never been, and our friend was released from the hospital. This took place approximately in 1957-1958 in Los Angeles. In the course of time, the formerly sick man, under the influence of other people, fundamentally changed towards Blessed John, forgetting the healing he had received. He caused Blessed John a lot of suffering. In the course of the following years this acquaintance of ours suffered from high blood pressure, a nervous breakdown, and general sclerosis in a form that was very difficult to treat. Three years ago he died.
5.) One very pious Russian Orthodox man became very seriously ill. He had to make a decision whether or not to have a very complicated surgery: a replacement of a worn-out section of his spine with an art- ificial section made out of plastic. Early in the morning, before the surgery, I sent a

 462 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
telegram to Blessed John in San Francisco, asking him to pray for the seriously sick man, indicating the hour of the surgery and his name. Blessed John knew the family and loved them. We believe that the operation was very successful thanks to the prayer of Archbishop John. The sick man began quickly to recover and later returned to his former work. The surgery was performed on the day of Saints Cyril and Methodius, May 11/24, 1966, in Los Angeles. Before the op- eration the sick man, M. P., received Holy Communion, giving himself over to the will of God. He is healthy up to this day.
Glory be to God for all His great mercies according to the prayers of the now late Archbishop John Maximovitch.
Nadezhda Shoomliansky July 24/August 6, 1971
28915 N. Banquet Cyn. Rd. Saugus, California 91350
96.
Restoring of Life through the Holy Mysteries
Bless, O Lord!
I want to describe a miracle that took place through the prayers of our ever-mem- orable Archbishop John.
In Shanghai in 1945, my relative worked as a nurse's aid in the Jewish Hospital. One midnight the door bell rang and she went to see who it was through a little window in the door, not knowing if she should open

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 463
it right away since she had just recently begun to work there. She told the head nurse that it was Archbishop John, and the head nurse said, "Quickly open the door." She opened it and went up for a blessing. Not saying anything, Blessed John proceeded along the corridor. They watched, wondering to whom he would go in the ward. Then he went in where there was a woman lying in a coma. A concilium of doctors had stated that she should die that night. Near her sat
her brother.
Having and her,
entered, began to he asked
Blessed John pray. Then, the brother
placed
having
whether
"No," answered the brother, "we seldom go to church. She became sick and went to the hospital."
The bishop left and after some time she opened her eyes and said to her brother, "TI saw that near my bed a monk stood and prayed, and he asked me if I had received Holy Communion. I said no, and he blessed me and left." The brother asked if she would want to receive Holy Communion, to’ which she said yes. Then he asked the nurse how that could be done, and she said that they would telephone the cathdral early in the morning. But even before they telephoned, a .priest came in and said that the bishop had sent him to a particular ward to give Holy Communion to the sick woman. She re- ceived the Holy Communion with such great joy and began to get better. Later she left the hospital and came, together with her bro- ther, to the cathedral. When she saw the
an icon blessed
she had
received Holy
Communion.

 464 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
bishop, she said to him, "Your Eminence, you visited me in the hospital.” He had a talk with them and concluded, "Do not forget the Lord, and go to church and pray." Af- terwards she became a religious Christian.
And in that Jewish Hospital, the gateman was given an order that at any time, day or night, the doors must be opened to Bles- sed John. Blessed John also visited the hos- pital with his altar boys on the Feast of Theo- phany, bringing holy water and blessing the Orthodox Christians there by sprinkling them with it, while the boys sang the troparion: "When Thou, O Lord, wast baptized in the Jordan, the worship of the Holy Trinity was made manifest..." and so on. He did the same at Christmas. .
Anna [Lushnikova] 1967
97.
A Car-Accident Victim Restored to Health
We had a great sorrow befall us: our Archbishop John was transferred to Brussels [from France]. I was at his farewell service. The archbishop was in his "schema-looking
hat" [a strange-looking foldable mitre created by his orphans]. His sermon consisted only of a few words. But he looked very sorrow- ful.
In our days, I think that this man stands higher than all the people in our whole world. He lives already on a level for-

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 465
eign to us. It was not for nothing, they say, that in one Paris church (Roman Catholic), a priest addressing the youth said, "You de- mand proofs; you say that there are no mir- acles now, no saints. Of what use are the- oretical proofs for you, when today on the streets of Paris a saint is walking?"
Last summer, near. the _ Versailles church, I met a French woman who had con- verted to Orthodoxy. She, showing me the street, told me that after some sort of auto- mobile collision she had been dying in a hos- pital. She had asked for Blessed John, about whom she had heard much. When he arrived and came to her, she saw his eyes. He began to pray and she felt better; the pain stopped and she fell asleep. In the mor-
ning when
well. The
a miracle had simply taken place, and that she would live. Very soon after that she was on her feet again...
she woke up, she was absolutely doctors were amazed, saying that
Olga Rudolfovna Gutan France, 1961
98. | Termination of a Drought
In 1978 there was a terrible drought throughout the western United States, espec- ially in central California, which is the center of the nation's agricultural food output. The two previous years had been very dry also. The ground by 1978 was so dry that it was all cracked, as was clearly visible to any tra-

 466 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
veller throughout all the highways of the plains. The sight of the suffering emaciated cattle was especially pathetic, when one real- ized that, if the heavens would not send ab- undant rain upon the thirsty § land—and quick—, the cattle would have to be killed off since it would not be fit for meat, either.
With such gloomy thoughts a husband and wife, two friends of St. Herman's Bro- therhood, were often travelling in the vicinity of the once fertile Salinas River Valley, now hot and dry. Being conscientious Orthodox Christians, they could not but shudder at the prospect of such lamentable consequences if God was not to send down His rain. Of course, God's people prayed for the life-sus- taining precipitation all over the land—but weeks passed and there was no rain.: It seem- as if God did not hear them.
One day. while travelling across this pathetic-looking spectacle of groaning nature, the wife and mother of the family, seeing the same sight for miles and miles, came to a state of utter despair. She knew well that prayers were still offered all the time in many places—but to no avail. In her contrite heart she exclaimed to the Lord: "To whom then should we pray for rain? Whose prayers will intercede for the suffering nature? Help us, O Lord!"
And soon after this she saw a strange dream. While visiting our monastery some time later she told us about it. We asked her to describe it in a letter. This is the content of that letter:

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 467
"Concerning my dream—all I can say is that even then I did not remember it too clearly. I should have written it down right away, but I, a sinner, did not do it then.
But I remember for certain that I saw Arch- bishop John. He did not say anything to me, however. It seemed that he was sitting—whe- ther in his full vestments or not, I don't re- call exactly. Then I came up to him for a blessing and, bowing down, I thought to my- self: "Oh, here it is! That's to whom we should pray." I can't say for sure whether he blessed me then or not (though that's ve- ry important—whether there was a sign of the Cross in the dream). But as if answering my thought, Archbishop John turned slightly back, and from behind him he took and hand- ed to me a little bottle apparently of holy water, and my dream was over.
"I decided that this was the answer; that is, that we should pray to him for help. So 1 began to pray for the repose of the soul of Archbishop John, adding at the end "through his holy prayers" and asking for the rain. And soon after that the rains came —and the drought was over: of course, not
through my prayers. At that time I thought it very strange, as I personally did not know Archbishop John at all, and also at that time did not think of him; that is, in connection with the drought. And why should I of al] people see such a dream? It is incomprehenh- sible and almost unbelievable to me, especially as the time goes by. That was not in 1976, but in 1978, as I recall; and it was precisely then that the drought ended.

 468
BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER "With sincere respects,
Mrs. Irene Vagin November 7/20, 1979 Salinas, California"
99.
Help in Childbirth
Greetings in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ! Thank you again for sending me this book about Blessed Vladika John... I have strongly felt his prayers when in praying myself; I have pleaded to him to intercede with our Lord.
I was in the hospital with a laboring woman a couple of weeks ago. When in the middle of very active labor, the mother ex-
perienced
the baby
the fetal
to half the normal rate). She was rushed to the operating room for a forceps delivery. I went with her; and as I was standing out- side the operating room looking through the glass windows, I began praying to Vladika John to intercede for this woman and her child. —The fetal heart immediately returned to normal and stayed that way until delivery about 10 minutes later.
Thank you, Blessed Vladika John, for hearing all who call upon you.
God bless your work. In Christ,
Anne Barkham
March 30, 1987 Vancouver, B. C., Canada
acute, constant abdominal pain and became distressed (as observed on monitor—the fetal heart dropped

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 469
100.
The Saint’s Own Approval of
Publishing Miracles
Ever since the infamous trial in San Francisco, when one segment of Archbishop John's clerical colleagues attempted to public- ly defame the righteous man—there was felt an urgent need to publicize the good and holy deeds of the blessed one. But when his sudden repose came as an inevitable conse- quence of his being the object of persistent harassment, the need to publish his Life and miracles became the duty of the universal
consciousness of the Church. It seemed nat- ural that such an undertaking would meet general approval, support and acclaim. But instead—to the amazement of all who love God and His Saints—a _ veritable suppression fell upon those who would say a good word about the new God-chosen wonderworker of the 20th century! Amazingly enough, a whole series of obviously planned attempts began to stifle the good news about Blessed John. Just to mention a few: the first biographer, Bishop Savva, wrote to the compilers of this
book that, because of his spreading the ven- eration of Vladika John, he would endure persecution and so end his life. He was then forced to retire, silenced and forbidden to act as a bishop, because of which he soon died (in January, 1972), never finishing his biographical attempts. The two little works on

 470 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
the Saint which did appear were prevented from being sold at the synodal bookstore and were returned to the publishers. Divine Lit- urgies at the Saint's Sepulchre, which had once been served often (mostly by Archiman- drite Mitrophan), were officially restricted to once a year, and even the customary read- ing of the Psalter at his tomb during ser-
vices, when the
forbidden. And
was reprimanded for
Blessed John almost
testimonies of his
the free press in free America! When ques- tioned by the late Fr. Seraphim Rose, the ruling bishop said indignantly, "Don't print about Archbishop John until his enemies die!" But why? —was the natural reaction to this.
—By then his friends would also be dead and there would be nothing left to print! The significant answer followed: "Then you can write what you want!" —meaning that then it would be all right to "weave" ecclesiastically
harmless,
truthful,
real-life
those who
he really
complained
truth to
a friend and defender of
Sepulchre was open, was
the St.
Herman printing
Brotherhood material on time some
perhaps disturbing
accounts witnessed
of a by
Saint based actually was. The
on knew
facts the
Saint the way Brotherhood
St. this
Herman suppression
of the Nektary,
about
another hierarch, Bishop
response,
himself and concluded: "It would be a_ sin on your part if you, having received these tes- timonies and personally verified them, would not publish them for whatever reason."
Bishop Nektary
every miracles
appeared—in
impotent legends and not preserve
Blessed
stood up, crossed
John. In

 RECORD BOOK OF INTERCESSIONS 471
What interests us, however, is this: what is the will of the Saint himself regarding the attempts to publish about him?
There are many past cases of when Saints would posthumously confirm the verity of their lives. For example, when the writ-
ings of the great Bishop Ignatius Brianchin- inov were being subjected to criticism, the holy bishop appeared to a woman and told her, "All that is written in my books is the truth." In like manner did Blessed John pos- thumously appear to his closest friend and
disciple, Archimandrite
and encouraging him in the task of recording his own miraculous intercessions and spread- ing his veneration. Here is how Fr. Mitro- phan himself described this:
"Peace be to your souls and salvation! I have made a resolve to apply myself most seriously to gathering material about Vladika
John... I felt an urgent need to
and that night after my decision
and close-up saw Archbishop John.
very joyful and blessed me. Praise the Lord in his Saints. It is pleasing to God, because the Saints of God perform miracles not by their own power, but by His Divine Power. I already have verified a series of cases of when people received healings... Mercy and God's blessing upon you... I kiss you in the Lord. I will diligently pray for you in the Holy Land.
Your fervent supplicant before God, unworthy Archimandrite Mitrophan August 17/30, 1972
San Francisco, California"
Mitrophan, blessing
do this,
I
clearly He was

 
 EPILOGUE
The importance of Blessed John for the people of the 20th century cannot be under- estimated. Those who have read the entirety of this book have heard undeniable testimo- ny—coming from all over the world—of the tremendous spiritual power embodied in this frail little man. God was drawn to the burn- ing, loving heart of Blessed John, which be- came a vessel of His grace. He entrusted the Saint with heavenly secrets and the ability to transcend physical laws, making him a point of contact between Himself, the Creator, and us, His creatures.
Now that the venerators of Blessed John have for twenty years sought to glorify
him throughout the world, his name become associated with the image
has of a
courageous, adventurous
something miraculous at almost
This, to be sure, is the image that emerges if one looks at his life from a spiritual point
hero who every
did turn.
473

 474 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
of view. But those who did not know him during’ his lifetime should honestly ask themselves: would we have viewed him thus if we had seen him directly, not through the filter of two decades of his’ universal veneration? Let us remember that many active church-goers, conscientious clergy and widely respected hierarchs rejected or even despised Blessed John when he was alive. They openly
hissed at him when he walked
said that he was "proud" and
and likened him to the nasty
Father Ferapont in Dostoevsky's Brothers Ka- ramazov.
Our immediate reaction when hearing of such people is: "How could people be _ so blind? Wasn't it obvious that he was a Saint?" No, it was not "obvious." If one viewed the Blessed One externally, he was a_ shocking spectacle: dishevelled, bent over, with an im-
pediment
senseless
directed
him to reach such heights of asceticism—was mistaken for pride and irrational stubborn- ness. To many, he was just a cranky, self- wiled old man who insisted on his own, "wrong" ideas about what the Church should be doing. And what was worse to the world- ly-wise was that he could not be utilized for the glory of any clique or party. He was free before God. In short, he was an absolute dis- grace according to worldly logic, which sees only external appearances and looks for tem- poral advantages for oneself or one's group.
that made his speech
sound like of his God- that enabled
babble. The firmness will—the very quality
into church, in "prelest,"
character of

 EPILOGUE 475
The world, which lies in evil and whose prince is the devil, sought to diminish the in- fluence of Blessed John. Although it is impos- sible for that which is godly to "succeed" in terms of this fallen, corruptible earth, Saints like Blessed John are indeed victors in the face of eternity and the Last Judgment. The present dominion of evil should not cause us to passively allow ungodliness to triumph. It is our duty to defend the good against the attacks of the world. Therefore, even if we had been among those who saw behind exter- nal appearances and common opinions, even if we would have felt sympathy for Blessed John when he was being maligned and put on trial, this is not enough. If we are to be followers of what is godly, we must be heroes just as Blessed John was. We must be ready to risk even our "good name"—our personal or group status and "credibility"—in proclaiming the unmitigated power of God, Who is glorified in His Saints.
An Orthodox priest who has _ himself witnessed several miracles of Blessed John, has well said that "Blessed John is a kind of
'watershed,'
people. One
amples: those
John turn out
faithful to the Church of Christ, and those who do not venerate and even defame him, reveal themselves to be pursuing mercenary purposes and filled with conceit."
In most cases, it is envy that causes people to downplay the glory of a Saint. As a true apostle of Christ, Blessed John was an
especially in our time, between
can observe who are
many clear ex- venerating Blessed to be people dedicated and

 476 BLESSED JOHN THE WONDERWORKER
embarrassment to mere administrators who lacked his spirit. He was moved by love, and this love was given back to him in the same pure, unconditional form. Those who envied him were moved by calculations of what was most "prudent," and any "love" they may have received was merely the conditional res- pect commonly given to people of high stand- ing. They wished to do away with Blessed John because his love was very uncomfortable to them.
Disagreement surrounding the venera- tion of a Saint is nothing new in the Church. For example, we all know and love Saint Ser- aphim as a great Russian Saint. What is not well known, however, is the extent to which people derided Saint Seraphim during his life and sought to wipe out his memory among the faithful after his death. His followers faced great hardships in glorifying their beloved father and teacher. In fact, had it not been for the influence of Tsar-Martyr Nicholas II in canonizing the Saint, his jealous enemies would have had their way, and today he would scarcely be known at all.
Despite the devil's attempts to obscure the noble images of the Saints, which can awaken and inspire faith in Christians with inestimable power, Christ has promised that the gates of hell will not prevail against the Church (Matt. 16:18). In the case of Blessed John, the testimony of sanctity has become so abundant and obvious that the deceptions and tricks of the evil one have been impotent to hide it. Orthodox bishops have already cele- brated full services to Blessed John, consti-

 EPILOGUE 477
tuting local glorifications (canonizations) of him as a Saint.
There can be no doubt that Blessed John has been sent as agift of holiness to the people of the last days. At a time when imitation has become the norm in all aspects of life, when the authentic spirit of the Christian Faith has been so hidden that most are oblivious of its very existence, Blessed John can be seen as a model of genuineness. He is a kind of "measuring stick" that indi- eates who and what is real in our confusing times. The unit of measure is nothing else than pure Christian love, which Blessed John possessed and distributed in abundance. With this love, the intense struggle of spiritual life becomes worth the effort. Without it, all that remains of human _ relationships and church life is one type of manipulation or another: whether in the form of slander and
deceitful traps, or in the flattery and recognition.
Blessed John has_~
"tone" of true apostleship
world. As more people are drawn into the Orthodox Church of Christ before the final unleashing of evil, may they look to him as their loving guide and a pastor who knows no death.
form of
mutual
set. the in the
right modern

 “Tell the people: although I have died,
I am still alive!”
—Blessed John
